7
French National Digital Security Strategy — Introduction
Introduction
France is going through its digital transition. 
Networks are omnipresent in the functioning of 
the State, economic activity and the daily lives of 
citizens. 
Digital technology engenders new uses, new 
products and new services and is therefore a factor 
of innovation. It leads to transformation in most 
trades. It transforms sectors of activity and businesses giving them more flexibility and competitiveness. Boosted by digital support, these sectors 
are simultaneously more exposed to digital threats. 
Doing without digital technology or the lack of 
access to it results in a form of economic and social 
exclusion. Similarly, the sovereignty of a State that 
does not have the autonomy required in the digital 
sector would be threatened.
For digital technology to remain an area of 
freedom, exchanges and growth, trust and security 
must be established and defended. Only through a 
collaborative and coordinated effort can this objective be attained.
*     *
*
An initial cybersecurity strategy was developed in 
France in early 2010 and was published in early 2011 
shortly after the discovery of a cyberattack, the intention of which was to spy on the economic and finance 
ministries. The attackers, who had been acting for several months, had taken control of the core of one of 
the ministerial networks and were regularly collecting 
political, economic and financial information.
This type of cyberattack targets many French businesses of all sizes in all sectors of activity. Businesses 
are also the target of all types of fraud such as malware 
infection that makes the business’ files unusable until a 
ransom is paid by means that are difficult to trace.
In parallel, computer system intrusions aimed at 
stealing personal information (identity, identification 
data on commercial websites and bank details) are on 
the rise. Most of the times, it concerns criminals committing crimes that are identical to those known in 
the material world such as theft, fraud and blackmail, 
but in an industrialised manner, with less risk of being 
identified and prosecuted. Organised crime has seized 
the opportunity provided by electronic communication 
networks. Their technical capabilities are increasing to 
the point where they are now capable of carrying out 
acts of sabotage or taking production tools hostage, for 
themselves or through subcontracting by hybridisation.
Harassment campaigns are developing on social 
networks, such as cases of fraud victimisation whereby gullible subjects are persuaded to transfer money 
abroad. 
The defacement of many websites, notably those belonging to territorial authorities, following the attacks 
of January 2015 and the cyberattack a few weeks later 
on a French international media have demonstrated the 
intention and ability of organised groups to cripple information system resources that support our daily lives.
What was recognised as «the state of threat» established in 2010, therefore turned out to be accurate. At 
present, the threat is intensified by the increase in the 
capabilities of attackers, the proliferation of techniques 
8
French National Digital Security Strategy — Introduction
of attack and the development of organised crime in 
cyberspace.
But another type of challenge has arisen; that posed 
by the appropriation of digital wealth by a business 
oligopoly using their dominant position to interfere 
with the arrival of new businesses and to harness the 
added value of this budding economy, which will exploit data intended to invent new services, improve our 
daily lives or make public services more accessible. At 
the forefront of these data is our personal data; including those related to our privacy. Control of this mass 
of data opens the way to economic destabilisation 
and to sophisticated forms of propaganda or ways to 
mislead people’s judgments and habits. In this respect, 
this threat is a matter for national defence and security, 
because of its national extent and strategic issues. 
*     *
*
In light of these risks, which unfortunately are 
already established, much has already been accomplished. 
As was announced in the 2008 French White Paper 
on Defence and National Security, a national agency 
was created as of 2009 to address cyberattacks and to 
protect the State information systems and critical infrastructures.
An industrial policy in favour of the national cybersecurity industry is notably supported by the future 
investments programme and in the framework of the 
«Future industry» plan.
In 2013 the French Parliament voted for the measures recommended by the Government aimed at reinforcing the cybersecurity of operators of vital importance and of those who participate in their most critical 
information systems.
France’s positions are supported within all international bodies, and notably the United Nations (UN) 
which acknowledged the application of international 
law to cyberspace in 2013. In addition, bilateral operational relations with several countries have been initiated by the State’s services.
The ministries have become aware of the political 
and technical impact of information technologies on 
their missions and administration activity and are becoming equipped with coordinators in charge of digital 
issues and the security aspects thereof. A State Information Systems Security Policy was developed and is 
progressively being implemented.
In the coming years it should be possible to reap 
the benefits of the measures taken and to extend the 
scope of public action and stakeholders. It must now be 
acknowledged and made known that the defence and 
security of digital technology depends on the national 
community and not only on the action of the State. 
*     *
*
Up until the past few years, our defence and national security depended on the expertise, behaviour and 
decisions of men and women with access to the most 
sophisticated, protected and secret installations and 
equipment. But with the emergence of a society that 
is massively connected, this responsibility is now partially shared by all French people. One connected object or one service that is inadequately secured by its 
developers, negligence by one information systems’ security decision-maker, dangerous behaviour by one service provider or by one employee who carelessly mixes 
private life and professional life can lead to losses in 
availability, confidentiality or integrity of essential information, suspensions in activity and economic losses, 
industrial accidents and losses of human lives or ecological catastrophes and disturbances in public order, 
capable of affecting the life of the entire nation.
In fact, never has the stability of our future, supported by digital technology, been so dependent on 
each person’s responsibilities and on the collective responsibilities of three communities of stakeholders.
The first community is responsible for recommending and implementing technologies, products and services equipped with the level of security that is adapted
9
French National Digital Security Strategy — Introduction
to the uses and capable of mitigating the identified 
risks. The main stakeholders in this community are 
researchers, product and service inventors and integrators, cybersecurity businesses, electronic communications network operators, internet service providers and 
remote data processing services. 
The second community is responsible for protecting 
the nation from digital pirates. Besides the implementation of cybersecurity policies, an aggressive policy to 
develop the required technical competences should be 
adopted, and an environment of trust should be established that supports the society’s digital transformation by defending citizens, our values and our interests 
in cyberspace. This responsibility obliges the bearer to 
express his position in favour of qualified security solutions and to promote national industry, also in relation 
to export. This community consists of elected officials, 
the Government, central and territorial administrations and trade unions.
The third community is responsible for using the 
available services and technologies in a well though tout manner, making rational choices and avoiding 
high-risk behaviours in actions related to digital life. 
This community consists of all users, companies’ managers, participants in civil society and citizens.  
These are synallagmatic commitments made by 
each stakeholder that enable France to fully benefit 
from the contributions of digital technology, transform 
the choices related to digital security into national competitive advantages – which are often currently experienced as an economic and behavioural constraint – 
and to promote our values, products and services.
The role of the State in cyberspace is to ensure 
France’s freedom of expression and action as well as the 
security of its critical infrastructures in case of a major 
cyberattack (objective 1), to protect the digital lives of 
citizens and businesses and combat cybercriminality 
(objective 2), to ensure the education and training required for digital security (objective 3), to contribute to 
the development of an environment that is conducive to 
trust in digital technology (objective 4) and to promote 
cooperation between Member States of the European 
Union (EU) in a manner favourable to the emergence 
of a European digital strategic autonomy, a long-term 
guarantor of a cyberspace that is more secure and respectful of our values (objective 5).
1
FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS,  
DEFENCE AND SECURITY OF STATE 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND  
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES,  
MAJOR CYBERSECURITY CRISIS
14
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 1
 STAKES
France is the target of cyberattacks that damage its fundamental interests. Today, when an attacker targets the State, 
operators of vital importance or strategic businesses, the aim is for long-term installation in the 
information system in order to steal confidential 
data (political, diplomatic, military, technological, 
economic, financial or commercial). In the future, 
an attacker could take control of connected objects, 
remotely interrupt an industrial activity or destroy 
its target. Since 2011, about one hundred major cyberattacks have been addressed, most often in complete confidentiality, by competent administrations 
and service providers.
In parallel, the positions taken by France on the 
international scene, its military operations and certain public debates are followed by cyberattacks 
aimed at marking public opinion. For example, 
the defacement of many websites after the terrorist attacks that targeted France in the beginning 
of 2015 had a technically low but symbolically high 
impact desired by the attackers. Similarly, the cyberattack that led to the interruption of an international French media was also aimed at making 
a strong impression and contributes to the radicalisation that leads to terrorist acts. This attack also 
demonstrated the capacity of attackers determined 
to disrupt the functioning of a highly symbolic infrastructure. 
For several years now many States have implemented their political will and considerable human, technical and financial means to carry out 
large-scale cyberspace operations against us.
Whether they are known through publicly disclosed documents or revealed during the treatment 
of cyberattacks, the excesses of such practices harm 
the credibility of some of these States on the international scene and destroy the trust that would be 
naturally attributed to their businesses’ digital products and services.
Therefore, the cyber risk, which was placed in 
third position for major threats to France by the 
2013 White Paper on Defence and National Security, 
is now reinforced and constitutes a major challenge 
facing France.
 OBJECTIVE
France will ensure the defence of its fundamental interests in cyberspace. It will reinforce the digital security of its critical infrastructures and do its 
utmost to ensure that of its essential operators to 
the economy.
 ORIENTATIONS
> Having the scientific, technical and industrial 
capabilities required to protect sovereign information, ensure cybersecurity and develop a trustworthy digital economy.
An Expert Panel for Digital Trust will be created, 
under the aegis of the State Secretariat for Digital 
Technology and the National Authority for the Security of Information Systems.
The Expert Panel for Digital Trust will very regularly unite the competent administrations of the Prime 
Minister, the Ministry of National Education, the Ministry of Higher 
Education and Research, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health and Women’s Rights, the Ministry of Economy, Industry, 
and Digital Technology and the Ministry of the Interior, the General Commission for Investment, the National Research Agency and the research organisations 
concerned. The panel can include stakeholders from the 
« the excesses of such practices harm 
the credibility of some of these States 
on the international scene and destroy 
the trust that would be naturally 
attributed to their businesses’  
digital products and services. »
15
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 1
private sector and qualified key figures in their work.
The mission of this panel will notably be to identify 
the key technologies for which in-depth knowledge is 
required for cybersecurity professions and in general 
for the development of a trustworthy digital environment. It will evaluate the initial and continuing education needs, will monitor Research and support its development, participate in improving support for young 
PhD holders. In the field of digital technologies, it will 
contribute to setting the strategic goals of systems for 
financing and supporting research and industrial development. This work will be implemented in consistence 
with that of the structures that have already been established such as the French Security Industries Sector 
Association (CoFIS).
In general, the choice of major private stakeholders in terms of economic or technological model, 
which are sometimes external to any normalisation 
framework, or simply certain innovations in digital 
uses, can consolidate trust or incite mistrust. The Expert Panel for Digital Trust will organise technological 
and economic monitoring through which evolutions of 
digital related issues can be anticipated. If necessary, 
adapted measures will be recommended to support or 
supervise these changes. These measures could, for example, concern the protection of the Nation’s scientific 
and technical potential or the control of foreign investments in critical national businesses.
The ministerial coordinators for cyberspace issues 
in collaboration with the General Secretary of Defence 
and National Security will come together in an Expert 
Panel Commission for the subjects that fall within its 
competence. 
This Expert Panel will also give an annual report to 
the Prime Minister on its activities.
> Ensuring active monitoring of the security of 
technologies and uses for the State, businesses and 
citizens.
In anticipation of major technological developments, such as the 5th generation of mobile telecommunications (5G) or «software-defined networks», France 
will remain attentive to the type and capabilities of 
equipment and software installed within these electronic communication networks, to protect the privacy of 
correspondences, that of its citizens and the resilience 
of these infrastructures, and will continue to adapt its 
regulatory framework to new emerging technologies.
The National Authority on Information Systems Security will regularly inform the ministries, businesses, 
territorial authorities and citizens, by means adapted 
to the target community, of factors that might present 
a danger in terms of digital use. These information will 
have been consolidated beforehand with the competent 
administrations.
> Accelerating the reinforcement of State Information Systems Security.
Since 2010, several measures have been taken to 
raise the level of security of State information systems. 
A State Information Systems Security Policy (PSSIE) 
was developed, an inter-ministerial electronic communications network is in rapid growth and the roll-out 
of secured mobile terminals has been initiated. These 
measures, like those aimed at producing the security 
equipment to protect sovereign information, mobilise 
human and budgetary resources. They will be pursued 
in order to provide to the Government and our military 
capabilities with the level of security adapted to longterm preservation of France’s autonomy in making decisions and taking action. 
The application of the State Information Systems 
Security Policy and the effectiveness of the measures 
adopted will be evaluated annually. An annual confidential report will be transmitted to the Prime Minister and the Parliament will be informed by means of 
indicators.
With the same objective of informing the Parliament, as of 2016, bills will have a section in their impact 
assessment dedicated to digital technology which will 
also include cybersecurity, established under the auspices of the senior civil servants in charge of the quality of regulation. More broadly, senior civil servants in 
charge of the quality of regulation will ensure that the 
17
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 1
issues related to the reinforcement of the security of information systems is taken into account in the steering 
of the normative process.
> Preparing France and the multilateral organisations to which it belongs to face major cybersecurity 
crises.
Reinforcement of the security of the most sensitive 
information systems of operators of vital importance, 
which was announced in the 2013 White Paper on Defence and National Security, was the subject of legislative measures (Articles 21 and 22 of law n° 2013-1168 of 
18 December 2013). The work started with these operators will continue over the long term, notably by routine updating of regulatory texts. This work will be progressively extended, as is specified by the law, to public 
and private operators who participate in these sensitive 
information systems.
This choice made by France will have made it possible to actively participate in the development of the 
orientations of the European Directive concerning 
measures to ensure a high common level of network 
and information systems security across the Union and 
to anticipate its transposition. At the right moment, 
France will specify the operators who are essential to 
its economy according to the orientations of the Directive and will participate in the European initiatives intended to reinforce their digital security. 
Over time, cybersecurity crises management exercises carried out at the national level will progressively 
concern the entire territory and vitally important activity sectors. The Ministry of Defence, in collaboration 
with the National Authority on Information Systems 
Security, will continue to implement a cyberdefence 
reserve for operational purposes to face major information technology crises. 
In parallel, France will continue to contribute to the 
emergence of an environment of voluntary cooperation 
for cybernetic crisis management at the European level, 
by supporting the work of the European agency ENISA 
(European Union Agency for Network and Information 
Security) in particular.
It is up to the CERT-EU (Computer Emergency Response Team of the European Union (EU) institutions, 
bodies and agencies) and to the NCIRC (Computer Incidence Response Capability) within the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) to ensure the cyberdefence of their respective institutions. France, which is 
active during cybersecurity crisis management exercises organised by these organisations, and which is 
highly represented in proceedings that orient EU and 
NATO choices concerning secured digital technologies, 
will continue to provide its support to these institutions 
and their members according to their respective competences.
France will also contribute to reinforcing the cybersecurity of other international organisations to which it 
belongs, on a political and technical level, notably those 
hosted on the national territory that benefit from the 
national technical environment.
> Developing an autonomous way of thinking that 
is in line with our values.
The strategic choices made by France immediately 
after the Second World War led to the emergence of an 
autonomous way of thinking and the development of a 
doctrine that gave France a unique place on the international scene and today still permeates its diplomacy 
and the concepts behind the use of its armed forces.
Although digital technology fundamentally changes 
our societies, its impact on other realities such as those 
of sovereignty, national territory, currency or the fundamental interests of the Nation is yet to be measured 
and the organisation and means of public action to 
make the law apply to it or to ensure their protection 
must be reconsidered. A discussion, coordinated by the 
General Secretary of Defence and National Security, 
will be held to develop an intellectual corpus related to 
cyberspace.
2
DIGITAL TRUST, PRIVACY,  
PERSONAL DATA, CYBERMALEVOLENCE
20
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 2
 STAKES
Although in general the French trust in digital technology, they are wary of its impact on their daily lives and especially their personal lives. But despite being generally 
careful in the use and preservation of their personal 
data, they entrust them to platforms for which the 
conditions of use are one-sided to users’ detriment. 
The technique noted during certain cyberattacks 
against businesses or administrations also shows a 
real difficulty separating private and professional 
life when using equipment and services. 
The objective of cyberattacks against individuals is usually financial gain. By taking control of 
the personal equipment used (computers, tablets, 
smartphones), usurping identity and stealing users’ 
banking or commercial website credentials, starting a friendly virtual relationship that ends with a 
request for a money transfer, or encoding data without the user’s knowledge resulting in the payment 
of a ransom, racketeering is today widely practised 
by a criminal element that has become organised 
and increasingly efficient. 
While no special technique of attack is used, harassment, which is facilitated and amplified by electronic communication networks, is a digital aggression against people with results that are sometimes 
tragic.
Although the National Cybersecurity Agency 
(ANSSI) is the identified State contact in case of 
serious cybersecurity incidents that affect the administrations and operators of vital importance, 
there is far less clarity regarding the public offer for 
assistance to victims of cybermalevolence for the 
other stakeholders, whether it concerns intermediate-sized enterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises, liberal professions, territorial authorities 
or individuals. 
Victims of cybermalevolent acts are encouraged 
to file a complaint with the police or gendarmerie services which have adapted to the treatment 
of such disputes. Nevertheless, the response with 
which they are provided in this framework is focused on the identification of those suspected of the 
cybermalevolent acts and on the commitment, if 
applicable, to filing proceedings against these suspects. Victims must be able to reach a service that 
is competent in the treatment of the cybersecurity 
incidents as these incidents are often the source of 
the cybermalevolent acts.
Digital platforms, including social networks, 
can shape opinion more insidiously and are often 
vectors of values that are not those of the French 
Republic. In certain cases, they can be used for purposes of disinformation and spreading propaganda 
to French citizens, in particular the youngest ones. 
The opinions that are disseminated are therefore 
against France’s fundamental interests and are an 
attack on defence and national security which is 
sanctioned by law.
Another area of concern is the recent and simultaneous developments of new uses and new data storage and processing techniques which contribute to 
the emergence of risks of economic imbalance and 
attacks on individual and national security. For example, the desire to introduce the free flow of data, 
including personal data collected by connected 
objects, through commercial treaties, does not successfully mask the intent to appropriate these data 
by oligopolies whose values and practices do not 
correspond with the French or European concept of 
privacy or with its legal framework. Massive and illicit appropriation of certain types of personal data, 
for example, health-related data, can actually affect 
individual and collective security, or simply result 
in abusive commercial exploitation (resale to insurance
« Digital platforms, including social 
networks, can shape opinion more 
insidiously and are often vectors  
of values that are not those  
of the French Republic. »
21
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 2
companies, for example). 
Digital technology development cannot be sustainable in a cyberspace where States do not respect 
the good practices required for a balanced digital 
transition that is beneficial to all nations and where 
a few economic players monopolise the wealth that 
constitutes digital data, notably personal data, true 
resources for future generations.
 OBJECTIVE
France will develop cyberspace use that is in line 
with its values and will protect the digital lives of 
its citizens. It will increase its combat against cybercrime and its assistance to victims of cybermalevolence acts.
 ORIENTATIONS
> Advocating and defending our values on electronic communication networks and in international 
proceedings.
Individual rights are applicable in the same way 
«on-line» and «off-line». Cyberspace should therefore 
remain a place of free expression for all citizens, where 
abuses can only be prevented within the limits set by 
the law and in line with our international agreements. 
In international proceedings, France advocates this approach aimed at preserving a free and open cyberspace. 
It is the State’s responsibility to inform citizens of 
the risks of manipulation and propaganda techniques 
used by malicious players on the Internet. After the terrorist attacks against France in January 2015, the Government established an information platform on the 
risks related to Islamic radicalisation via the electronic 
communication networks : 
« Stop-djihadisme.gouv.fr ». 
This approach could be extended to respond to other 
phenomena of propaganda or destabilisation. The competent defence and security services are responsible for 
detecting these phenomena and providing the Government with recommendations for implementing these 
measures.
> Providing local assistance to victims of cybermalevolent acts.
Co-piloted by the Ministry of the Interior and the 
National Agency for Information Systems Security, 
with the support of the Department of Justice, the Ministry of Finance and Public Accounts, the Ministry of Defence, 
the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Digital Technology, a national 
system will be established as of 2016 to provide assistance for victims of cybermalevolence. 
This system will also be aimed at increasing awareness of the challenges of protecting digital privacy and 
of prevention which, on a local level, will be based on 
measures taken by prefects and State services. ANSSI’s 
territorial network, the regional economic intelligence 
delegates and the competent economic security departments of the Ministry of the Interior, the «digital transition» network and that of the Bank of France (which 
could in the long run, integrate a criterion related to 
the consideration of the cyber risk in its company listing) will participate in this mission. An appeal will 
be made to the Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
the Guild Chambers and in general all the professional 
networks. 
The system will have a legal form and an organisation that will enable it to benefit from the contribution 
of economic stakeholders from the cybersecurity sector; software editors, digital platforms and solution providers. Thanks to the technologies implemented, the 
system should provide victims with technical solutions 
supported by local stakeholders and facilitate administrative procedures, notably to encourage the lodging of 
complaints.
« Digital technology development 
cannot be sustainable in a cyberspace 
where States do not respect the good 
practices required for a balanced digital 
transition that is beneficial  
to all nations »
22
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 2
> Measuring cybercrime.
The inter-ministerial work initiated by the Ministry 
of the Interior since 2013 has led to the conclusion that 
there are currently no reliable statistics specifically related to digital delinquency or cybercriminality since 
most of the offences concerned are registered under a 
classification that does not take into account this dimension, which is currently absent from the reference 
systems used.
The absence of such statistics is detrimental to the 
elaboration by the public authorities  of policies continuously reassessed and to the implementation of adequate measures. This is why the Ministry of the Interior 
will implement new instruments to monitor the development of cybercrime in order to guide public action. The 
National Delinquency and Penal Solutions Monitoring 
Agency will also contribute to it by dedicating a section 
of its work to the statistical examination of cybercrime. 
This section will integrate data transmitted by the National Authority on Information Systems Security and 
by the system for the assistance of victims of cybermalevolent acts, which have contributed to its elaboration.
> Protecting the digital lives, privacy and personal 
data of the French people.
With the prospect of the European Regulation on 
electronic identification (eIDAS - Electronic Identification and Trust Services), France will equip itself with 
a clear road map for digital identity delivered by the 
State. This road map will be established before the end 
of 2015 under the aegis of the Ministry of the Interior 
and Secretaries of State in charge of Digital Technology and State Reform, supported by the Departments of 
the Prime Minister, and should include a section that 
will define a framework of reference to the benefit of 
the territorial authorities to use digital identity delivered by the State.
This road map will take into account the Government’s digital strategy which provides for the roll-out 
of federated identity systems to enable the use of the 
same digital identity to authenticate the same person 
on different services. Thanks to these systems, digital 
identities can be provided by different entities as long 
as the third party responsible for managing the federated identity is capable of determining the level of 
23
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 2
trustworthiness associated with the identity.
Subject to compliance with the security requirements adapted to the uses and threats, these systems 
are intended to increase users’ trust in their digital world and contribute to its smooth flow while minimising 
the risk of unwanted processing of their personal data. 
For more sensitive use, such as that which concerns democratic life or international exchanges related to the 
law, high levels of trustworthiness of the systems and 
services will be systematically enforced. These high levels of trustworthiness will rely on the national industrial make-up and the established security certification 
scheme.
France will protect its citizens’ privacy and personal 
data. The right to privacy and individual and collective 
control of personal data will be reaffirmed whenever 
necessary and notably during commercial negotiations 
between States, whether bilateral or multilateral.
To inform the French people on the use made of 
their data entrusted to digital services, an identification system adapted and shared with the participating 
States and consistent with the European work carried 
out in the framework of the European Regulation related to the protection of personal data will be established during 2016. This identification system will make 
it possible to view the essential characteristics and 
conditions of use for digital platforms and services or 
means of payment used.
> Recommending technical solutions aimed at 
securing digital life and which are accessible to all 
businesses and the general public.
The competent State services will label securing solutions for personal terminals. An identification system 
that is consistent with the one recommended above will 
enable users to be informed of the potential transmission of information to third parties in the framework 
of this protection. Once created, the system for the assistance of victims of cybermalevolent acts mentioned 
above, as part of its mission of prevention, will advocate 
these systems to the public concerned. 
In addition, and since it was possible to initiate this 
by the future investments programme, the offer of 
accessible and adapted solutions to secure the digital 
lives of small and medium-sized enterprises will be supported.
Support for the development of French solutions 
will be provided as well as for the free software communities that develop security solutions.
> Reinforcing the operational mechanisms of legal international mutual aid and universalising the 
principles of the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime.
The Budapest Convention, which was adopted in 
2001 in the framework of the Council of Europe, has 
become a reference instrument that enables States of 
the five continents to cooperate in the combat against 
cybercrime. Ratified by 46 States, including 7 nonmembers of the Council of Europe, this instrument 
now unites 125 States for one reason or another (signatories, States invited to become members, States receiving technical assistance in view of future membership, 
States that have adapted their internal law to the model 
of the Convention). 
It is now essential to universalise and consolidate 
the base of norms as well as the tool of cooperation that 
this text is composed of.
In addition, France will advocate the definition 
of a system of simplified legal cooperation between 
Member States within the European Union in order to 
accelerate the transmission of data and put an end to 
illegal activities.
stratégie nationale pour la sécurité du numérique - INTRODUCTION
25
3
RAISING AWARENESS, INITIAL  
TRAINING, CONTINUING EDUCATION
26
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 3
 STAKES
France is late in comparison to its partners in terms of raising the awareness of its population to the risks associated with the 
use of digital technologies and in cybersecurity training.  
In general, the French neglect good practices 
when using electronic communication networks. 
In private use of electronic communication 
networks, children and adolescents confronted with 
unsuitable content, exposed to harassment or predation, are the primary victims. In order to break 
the silence and enable legal proceedings, the youngest subjects should be taught how to proceed when 
they are victims of digital malevolence.  
Raising the awareness of everyone is a required 
prerequisite for elected officials, administrative or 
business leaders to be able to take «cyber risk» into 
account at the right level and to choose measures 
capable of protecting the citizens whom they represent or the organisations that they run, in light of 
the threats of information or intellectual property 
theft, violation of personal data, or even exposure 
to breakdowns in activity and production accidents, 
with the technological or environmental impacts to 
which they are potentially exposed. 
Besides raising the awareness of the youngest 
subjects, training in digital technology professions 
should provide future professionals in the field with 
extensive information systems security skills, which 
remains currently absent from many higher education programmes. 
In addition, the content and number of initial 
training and higher education programmes for cybersecurity professions do not meet the needs of businesses and administrations.
 OBJECTIVE
France will raise children’s awareness of digital 
security and responsible cyberspace behaviours as 
of school age. Initial higher education and continuing education will include a section dedicated to 
digital security adapted to the sector under consideration.
 ORIENTATIONS
> Raising the awareness of all French people.
An ambitious awareness-raising programme for all 
French people should be initiated.
Under the command of the Ministry of National 
Education, Higher Education and Research and the 
State Secretariat for Digital Technology, with the support of the Government’s Information Department and 
the National Agency for Information Systems Security, 
a call for a show of interest in the creation of educational content for the general public will be launched.  
The Ministry of the Interior will continue the «Internet Licence» operation which was initiated in 2014 
by the Gendarmerie in collaboration with a private 
foundation, and taken over by the National Police since 
the beginning of 2015. This operation makes it possible 
to raise the awareness of risks and to give advice to 
more than 300,000 sixth-year students to protect their 
Internet browsing.
The visibility of the “A digital education for all” portal of the CNIL will be reinforced.
The associations will be invited to develop advertising campaign projects aimed at increasing trust in 
digital technology and which could become a part of a 
«great national cause».
27
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 3
> Integrating cybersecurity awareness into all 
higher and continuing education programmes.
The Ministry of National Education, Higher Education and Research, with the assistance of the University 
Presidents’ Conference, the Grandes Ecoles Conference 
and the competent administrations, will encourage the 
establishment of cybersecurity awareness corresponding to the educational field in all initial higher education programmes as of the start of the 2016 academic 
year.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, 
supported by the competent cybersecurity State administrations, will initiate the consultations required for 
the organisations that provide continuing education to 
integrate cybersecurity issues adapted to the training 
in the curriculum as of 2016. 
Finally, the State Secretariat in charge of Digital 
Technology, along with the ministries concerned and 
the support of ANSSI, will coordinate the initiation of 
the awareness programme for the professional categories in which an inculcation of cybersecurity issues is 
particularly necessary in relation to their societal responsibilities. These categories will be specified by the 
Strategic Committee for Digital Trust.
> Integrating cybersecurity training into all 
higher education that includes some information 
technology.
The «CyberÉdu» initiative launched in 2013 confirmed that teachers involved in the higher education curricula for information technology professions are interested in the subjects related to information systems 
security. This initiative should be reinforced.
The Ministry of National Education, Higher Education and Research, with the assistance of the University 
Presidents’ Conference, the Grandes Ecoles Conference, 
the administrations and competent professional organisations, will ensure that information systems security 
training adapted to the field and which covers issues 
related to digital technology is provided in all initial higher education programmes as of the start of the 2016 
academic year. The priority should be to integrate these 
security elements in the existing courses and in a pertinent manner in the broader context of each field that 
is taught. It would be useful to base these steps on the 
educational contents being developed, in close collaboration with the teaching community, in the framework 
of the CyberEdu project. 
The Ministry of Decentralisation and Public Service 
will ensure that training programmes for public service 
functions include elements of cybersecurity training. In 
collaboration with the Ministry of the Interior, it will 
ensure that the recruitment examination for the civil 
servants corps of information and communication systems engineers regulated by Decree n° 2015-576 of 27 
May 2015, as well as the training that will be provided 
for the members of the corps will have a cybersecurity 
section. 
In light of a growing demand from our partners, 
whenever possible, a part of the training and education offer should be adapted to an international public, 
notably by providing programmes in the English language.
> Recording and anticipating the initial and continuing education needs.
Under the aegis of the Expert Panel for Digital 
Trust, the short, medium and long-term initial training 
needs will be established in collaboration with all the 
stakeholders concerned in the administration and the 
private sector.
The professional trade unions will be called on to 
develop and implement continuing education programmes adapted to the needs of employees and businesses.
stratégie nationale pour la sécurité du numérique - INTRODUCTION
29
4
THE ENVIRONMENT OF DIGITAL 
TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES, INDUSTRIAL  
POLICY, EXPORT AND INTERNATIONALISATION
30
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 4
 STAKES
Cyberspace is under rapid growth. 100,000 new objects connect to the Internet every hour. Many French businesses participate in international shows and the success of the 
«French Tech» initiative for example, shows a real 
dynamism of French innovation in digital products 
and services. However, this reality should not hide 
a certain loss of control and real technological dependence.
Large equipment that ensures the functioning 
of electronic communication networks with infrastructures located in France, is often designed, 
developed and managed from centres located outside Europe. The same goes for most of the communications and data security equipment of our 
operators of vital importance. The operation of an 
increasing number of businesses is based on the 
use of applications and data processing hosted in 
uncontrolled virtual spaces, supported by physical 
infrastructures located outside the national territory and not subject to European law. 
With the increase in the number of connected 
objects or the concentration of on-line service platforms in the hands of only a few stakeholders for 
example, current developments both in technology and in economic models magnify this loss of 
control in the national cyberspace. In the event of 
an international crisis, access to entire sections of 
cyberspace could be contested. 
The answer to this issue of sovereignty requires 
first and foremost the maintenance of a strong and 
competitive national and European industry in the 
specialised field of cybersecurity products and services. In general, it requires the development, in 
France and Europe, of a digital equipment and service offer that provides clients with the guarantees 
of security and trust adapted to the issues and uses. 
Users do not have the means to ensure the level of security of digital objects and services themselves. The promotion of security in marketing 
arguments by suppliers is becoming widespread 
without, however, allowing for an objective evaluation of the level of security actually achieved. The 
development of greater clarity in terms of security 
in the digital offer based on objective elements that 
can be verified by a third party, constitutes a major 
challenge for ensuring trust in the digital economy.
The development of an offer of cybersecurity 
products and services by national businesses in 
the digital technology sector should also be seen 
as an essential factor of competitiveness for these 
businesses. The field of payment methods (smart 
cards, payment terminals, etc.) is the archetype of 
an economic sector in which an adapted level of security against threats which can be verified by third 
parties constitutes a first-line marketing argument. 
Several national businesses hold a competitive international position in this sector that is largely due 
to the excellence that they were able to develop and 
demonstrate in the field of security. 
The increase in cyber threats and the growing 
awareness of the reality of these threats will lead 
to making security an essential purchase criterion 
in many other sectors a few years from now. Acting 
now to improve the security and transparency of 
the national offer for digital solutions also means 
preparing their future competitiveness.  
In 2015, the share of French businesses, and especially SMEs, that widely use digital technology is 
only within the average of the European countries. 
Catching up from behind should be accompanied by 
improved security of the digital lives of businesses 
starting with better security of their information 
systems. This is essential for our competitiveness 
and therefore our jobs.
The challenge for French businesses is to reconcile the search for productivity, savings and 
« The development of an offer of 
cybersecurity products and services 
by national businesses in the digital 
technology sector should also 
be seen as an essential factor of 
competitiveness for these businesses. »
31
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 4
profitability with the use or development of digital 
products and services that do not endanger their 
competitiveness or security, those of their partners 
or their clients.
Most digital equipment, objects and services that 
are currently available on the market do not have 
the level of data security that enables them to avoid 
an incident: data leakage, malfunction or break in 
service. For French businesses, ergonomics, the protection of personal data and the level of security of 
digital products and services that they develop and 
produce, in the short term should become a differentiator, a competitive advantage for them and in 
return, for the nation. 
In addition, although counterfeiting does not 
directly fall under information systems security, 
counterfeit cybersecurity products can endanger 
the activity of organisations that purchase them.
In terms of the internationalisation of businesses and export, considering the environment 
of extreme international competition in which our 
partners provide solid and structured support to 
their industry, the State services should become sustainably organised to support French cybersecurity 
businesses. 
The mobilisation and coordination of all the public and private resources available are essential to 
increase the visibility and competitiveness of the 
French offer on an international level and to pool 
knowledge and feedback and thereby contribute to 
the sharing of information between the different 
stakeholders in the field.
 OBJECTIVE
France will develop an environment that is favourable to research and innovation and will make 
digital security a factor in competitiveness. It will 
support the development of the economy and the 
international promotion of its digital products and 
services. It will ensure that digital products and services with levels of ergonomics, trust and security 
adapted to the uses and cyber threats are available 
to its citizens, businesses and administrations.
 ORIENTATIONS
> Developing and accentuating the national and 
European offer of security products and services.
In collaboration with the competent administrations of the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Digital 
Technology and the Ministry of Defence, in 2012 the 
National Agency for Information Systems Security initiated an industrial policy to develop the national fabric 
of businesses that develop cybersecurity products and 
services.
The launch of the New Industrial France «cybersecurity» plan in 2013, now included in the «Digital Trust» solution, and the support of the General 
Commission for Investment and of BpiFrance made it 
possible to organise the sector and issue requests for 
proposals aimed at creating an offer for trustworthy 
equipment to detect cyberattacks, essentially for operators of vital importance, and secured mobile products 
for all businesses.
The State services will increase their efforts to qualify and monitor cybersecurity products and services, 
and support the development of new security products 
that correspond to the changes in usage patterns. They 
« For French businesses, ergonomics, 
the protection of personal data and the 
level of security of digital products and 
services that they develop and produce, 
in the short term should become a 
differentiator, a competitive advantage 
for them and in return,  
for the nation. »
33
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 4
will also support the enhancement and perpetuation of 
these offers through public contracting that chooses security products and services qualified at the right level, 
as well as by communication and educational measures 
for the private sector.
In addition, the State services will endeavour to 
disseminate the results of research and development 
which they finance for high-level security equipment 
in order to raise the security level of products for businesses and the general public. 
Finally, France will endeavour to take full advantage of leverage offered by the European Union to support, promote and defend French scientific, technological and industrial competences in the cybersecurity 
fields. It will also discourage the EU from limiting itself 
to the role of consumer, and will incite it rather to stand 
out as an indispensable global stakeholder for the offer 
in this sector.
> Transferring acquired knowledge to the private 
sector to contribute to the handling of its cybersecurity.
For five years now France has equipped itself with 
the capacity to detect and respond to cyberattacks, as 
announced in the 2008 White Paper on Defence and 
National Security. Although this effort should be pursued, notably by ANSSI, it is up to the private sector to 
ensure its own security in the field of information technology as is the case in other fields, since the State services are only required to intervene in case of serious 
crisis. 
Supported by the transfer of this knowledge acquired by the administrations to the private sector, 
labelling of competent and trustworthy service providers should enable the detection and treatment of the 
inevitable growth in the number of cyberattacks that 
businesses are subjected to.
> Preparing a safer digital world through better 
anticipation of uses, adapted support and stakeholders’ information.
For the next five years, the priority for the competent information systems security authorities should be 
anticipation and prevention. 
This will entail ensuring that the digital products 
and services or those that involve digital technology, 
which are designed, developed and produced in France, 
are among the safest in the world. To achieve this objective, the competent authorities should direct their 
communication efforts towards the public and private 
scientific community, and the innovation centres; competitive clusters, technological research institutes, incubators and «fab labs»; by devoting specific means to 
these areas as needed, as is the case with the Ministry 
of Defence, and more recently, the Ministry of the Interior. 
When digital products and services store personal 
data or are intended for the business sectors of vital importance, the State services will provide the elements 
that are useful for risk analysis or the recommendations required to obtain the level of security that corresponds to the use of the product or the service being 
designed or developed. For uses that justify it, they will 
also contribute to establishing systems to independently evaluate the level of security and trustworthiness 
of these products and services, and to providing their 
potential users with adapted guarantees through labelling. 
In parallel, the legal environment to accommodate 
new products and services should be anticipated. For 
example, the imminent arrival of autonomous cars 
should incite the regulator to prepare the conditions 
to ensure the security of their circulation. Cybersecurity should be taken into account in the international 
working groups that define the framework and control 
technical procedures.  
For other types of products or services, an adapted 
identification system should inform the consumer of 
their essential digital features and notably the processing of the data that is collected. For certain sectors 
such as the health sector, systematic labelling of digital 
products and services will be considered. 
France will endeavour to include other EU Member 
States in the implementation of these practices in order 
34
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 4
to create a zone of digital trust and security. The work 
initiated with Germany on cloud computing or secured 
messaging is moving in this direction.
> Integrating the requirements for cybersecurity 
in public contracting and support.
For the protection of its sovereignty and notably the 
protection of its information concerning the national 
defence secret, France will preserve its financial and industrial capacity to develop solutions with the highest 
levels of security.
In general, the entire administration should set an 
example in public contracting by integrating the right 
level of security criteria in its choices of digital products 
and services.
Finally, as of 2016 any product or service that is embedded in or is based on an information system and 
wants to answer a call for tenders, a request for public 
projects, or be eligible for public funds, will benefit 
from a bonus factor if it is accompanied by a cybersecurity risk analysis that corresponds to the intended use 
of the product or service.
> Supporting export and internationalisation of 
the businesses in the sector.
To support the economic development of the cybersecurity industrial sector, France will endeavour 
to reinforce the visibility and competitiveness of the 
French offer worldwide and to facilitate access of SMEs 
and start-ups notably to the international markets.
Inter-ministerial coordination will be structured 
and reinforced. An adapted French business support 
organisation will be established in addition to the occasional and often isolated measures that are currently 
led by the different ministries and State entities.  
Along with the possible creation of specific support 
systems for the stakeholders in the cybersecurity sector, the conditions for access to the existing support 
systems, as well as their implementation methods will 
be clarified and optimised. The procedures to control 
exportations of cybersecurity solutions will be clarified 
and optimised.
In addition, as is the case with «French Tech» creations, the collaborative initiatives generated by the private sector and intended to assist SMEs and start-ups on 
an international level will be supported.
5
EUROPE, DIGITAL STRATEGIC  
AUTONOMY, CYBERSPACE STABILITY
38
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 5
 STAKES
Cyberspace has become a major subject for negotiation within international organisations whose work now concerns the entire digital field.
In 2013, the States acknowledged that far from 
being a space without rules, cyberspace was governed by existing international law. Despite this, 
the international normative framework is still 
being debated, which, without any advancement 
in negotiations, could harm the preservation of a 
stable safe cyberspace that is compliant with the 
fundamental laws and is appropriate for the development of a prosperous trustworthy economy in 
the digital era. 
While an increasing number of countries are declaring themselves equipped with offensive capabilities, the level of conflict between States is increasingly being expressed in cyberspace. In addition, 
the massive revelations of practices and espionage 
techniques carried out by major States or alliances 
of States against other States (sometimes allies), 
people and businesses, have increased the political 
mistrust of countries that are at the origin of these 
practices and technical mistrust of their products 
and services. These revelations also contribute to 
the proliferation of similar technical methods.
In parallel, groups of individuals with diverse 
motivations and supports, mercenaries recruited 
worldwide and associated according to the circumstances, regularly take recourse in cyberattacks to 
attempt to destabilise the governing authorities of 
many countries or businesses that symbolise them. 
In addition, terrorist organisations take advantage of the audience provided by social networks 
to disseminate propaganda intended to attract volunteers and terrorise the populations. These different groups benefit from continuous media impact. 
On the economic level, the trend at the beginning of the decade is being confirmed. A small number of businesses supported by the States which 
enabled their development use their technological 
advance, their domination on the market and their 
financial capacities to pre-empt digital innovation. 
This privatisation of cyberspace to the benefit of a 
few monopolies condemns the other stakeholders 
in digital technology to dependence and harnesses 
a share of the added value of digital technology that 
is too great for this situation to be bearable for the 
economies of the other countries. 
Although it supports world growth, cyberspace 
has become a place of conflict and often unfair 
competition, which until now has been one of low 
intensity in terms of information technology, and of 
political destabilisation and economic hegemony.
Europe has been able to identify these issues and 
through dialogue and regulations is trying to provide ideas and solutions that are more respectful 
of sustainable digital development, both in terms 
of Internet governance and protection of personal 
data or cybersecurity of the operators who are essential to the economy. Despite having adopted a 
cybersecurity strategy in 2013, Europe is still struggling to assert digital strategic autonomy and equip 
itself with the tools required to rebalance cyberspace in its favour, even though this subject is now 
on the agenda for many European centres for discussions and negotiations.
Because it shares common values with other EU 
Member States, France and these Member States 
should play a driving role in digital technology.  
France wants to participate in the digital transformation of Europe through alliances. Europe 
built itself in the past through an alliance based on 
raw materials. Digital Europe will build itself on alliances, trust and data control, the raw materials of 
the coming decades.
« Although it supports world growth, 
cyberspace has become a place  
of conflict and often unfair  
competition »
39
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 5
 OBJECTIVE
Along with voluntary Member States, France 
will be the driving force behind European strategic 
autonomy. It will play an active role in the promotion of a safe, stable and open cyberspace.
 ORIENTATIONS
> Establishing a road map for European strategic 
autonomy with voluntary Member States.
This road map, which is open to the European 
Union Member States, will determine the key factors of 
success of the short-term implementation of the policies 
that are adequate for the emergence of a European digital strategic autonomy, notably in terms of regulations, 
standardisation and certification, research and development, trust in digital technology — while respecting 
Member States’ sovereignty — the protection of privacy and personal data conceived of as a public interest 
property.
Similarly, France will ensure that the international 
treaties negotiated in the name of Europe do not lead 
to technological or economic dependence of European 
stakeholders and to the alienation of the personal data 
of its citizens or sensitive data of its administrations, 
sources of destabilization of cyberspace. 
This will involve making Europe the digital territory that is most respectful of the fundamental rights 
of individuals and implementing a zone of trust and 
economic prosperity, in line with the precursor work 
between France and Germany on Cloud computing 
and the encrypted exchange of e-mails between the 
two countries.
> Reinforcing French presence and influence in 
the international discussions on cybersecurity.
In order to reinforce trust on an international level and to explore new regulation mechanisms aimed 
at preventing conflicts in cyberspace, France will reinforce its contact with all the parties directly involved 
who are willing to engage in dialogue on the issues of 
cybersecurity.
Participation in multilateral negotiations on cybersecurity (UNO, OSCE) will be intensified in order 
to consolidate a global base of commitments to good 
40
French National Digital Security Strategy — Objective 5
conduct in cyberspace for the States, in compliance 
with international law. 
Bilateral contact will be reinforced, notably in the 
framework of inter-ministerial diplomatic dialogue on 
the issues concerning cyberspace, headed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development.
Finally, to assert its influence, France will increase 
its investment in more informal international forums 
in which the technical and academic communities and 
the political decision-makers come together to discuss 
the future balances.
> Contributing to the global stability of cyberspace 
by assisting voluntary countries to establish cybersecurity capabilities.
Digital transition, the bearer of political, social and 
economic opportunities, is far from being uniformly 
controlled in all countries. This harms the security 
and development of States that are less protected, and 
weakens all digital environments on an international 
level. 
In order to contribute to a reliable and sustainable 
roll-out of digital technologies in all countries, and in 
particular the developing ones, France owes it to itself 
to assist in reinforcing the capabilities of countries 
that would like to increase the resilience and security 
of their information systems, notably in terms of the 
protection of critical infrastructures and the combat 
against cybercrime. 
To ensure the durability and sustainability of projects to reinforce capabilities, France will preferably 
act through long-term trustworthy partnerships.  This 
action should also enable France to reinforce its own 
cybersecurity.
