Page 7 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Introduction – The affirmation of a new ambition for France in cyber defence 
At a time when computer attacks are likely to seriously damage the interests of the Nation at any time, 
our country must adapt its cyber defence posture with the ambition of better exercising its digital 
sovereignty. 
With cyberattacks increasing in number, intensity and sophistication, it is advisable to oppose a 
national apparatus of protection and computer defence. This requires the mobilisation of diverse 
capabilities and skills, within the state but also at the heart of society. 
Better integrate our cyber defence means 
Faced with digital threats, the degree of resistance of a Nation and its aptitude for resilience depend 
as much on the means as on the organisation of its cyber defence. This presupposes good 
coordination of the various State services concerned, their cooperation with operators of vital 
importance * and essential services, the dissemination of good practices and adopted measures to 
economic actors and in the population. 
However, compared to the four other countries which share specific international responsibilities with 
it (the United States, Russia, China and the United Kingdom †), France still shows, despite a recently 
accentuated effort, a deficit when it comes to digital security. 
This is why the cyber defence strategic review proposes to better structure and develop our national 
protection apparatus. To this end, it recommends developing a specific programme of public 
resources devoted to cyber defence. 
Strengthening the resilience of France's vital systems 
Our country must have as its primary objective the hardening of its cyber protection apparatus and 
the strengthening of the resilience of state networks and operators of vital importance and essential 
services. Above all, we must be able to guarantee the continuity of essential functions. 
  
 
 
* In France, under the name of operators of vital importance (OIV) are grouped 249 organisations essential to 
the life of the Nation. 
† All permanent members of the United Nations Security Council and officially endowed nuclear states within 
the meaning of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). 
Page 8 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Like the human body which, under stress, first preserves its vital organs, the functions and missions 
essential to the survival of the Nation must be able to withstand a massive cyber shock. This impact 
resistance depends on the level of protection, redundancy and resilience of certain functions and the 
territorial continuity of communication networks. 
At the top of the list of priorities, alongside national defence imperatives, is the protection of the 
electronic communications and electrical energy supply sectors. While these sectors provide essential 
services, a cyberattack against them can have repercussions for all vital activities and potentially 
catastrophic effects on the nation's resilience. 
It is necessary to guarantee the functioning, in degraded mode if necessary, of the services in charge 
for civil protection, public security, medical emergencies and hospitals*. 
Besides, it is necessary to be able to restore the functioning of the main transport infrastructures as 
quickly as possible, which a computer incident, even on a limited scale, can disrupt massively†. Our 
transport infrastructure must also be protected against possible computer attacks carried out for 
sabotage purposes. 
Finally, several activities are essential for the proper functioning of large institutions which are the 
pillars of our democracy such as the Parliament, the Constitutional Council or the judicial authority 
must, therefore, be considered as of the utmost importance. Securing our electoral processes and 
the public service of audio-visual communication also requires special attention. 
Work internationally for the stability of cyberspace 
In order to fully contribute to the stabilisation of cyberspace, France's international action should aim 
at three objectives: 
  
 
 
* In 2015, in mainland France and the DROMs, 723 emergency services located in 644 health establishments 
treated 20.3 million acts. Alongside hospital emergency structures, 104 SAMUs and 410 SMURs provide 
orientation, prehospital care and patient transport (DRESS, Health establishments, 2017 edition, 
http://dress.solidarites-sante.gouv.com / IMG / pdf / 28-2.pdf). 
† For example, the breakdown of a single railway signalling station in the summer of 2017 affected more than 
50,000 SNCF users. With regard to air transport, our country must be able to guarantee the maintenance of a 
minimum flow of domestic and international traffic following a computer attack. This presupposes having the 
capacity to restore, quickly and under conditions acceptable in terms of flight security, l; activity of at least one 
of the two Parisian airport platforms, which alone represent more than half of the national traffic. 
Page 9 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• work on the regulation of cyberspace, through the respect and implementation of existing 
international law and agreed standards of behaviour, as well as through the adoption, if 
necessary, of new standards applicable to the behaviour of States as well as to that of 
private actors in cyberspace. It is a model of concerted regulation of cyberspace on a 
European and international scale which should be sought; 
• prevent computer attacks by strengthening our technical, organic and operational 
cooperation with our allies and partners, in particular within the European Union and the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO); 
• be able to manage an international crisis linked to a cyberattack against it or one of its allies 
or partners, by defining reaction methods which would take full account of the politico-
diplomatic and international aspects of it. 
Seven principles for an enhanced cyber defence ambition 
Cyberspace appears today as a catalyst for progress but also a place of confrontation, domination 
and all kinds of traffic. This development is neither inevitable nor irreversible. What was doubtless 
illusory or too idealistic was to believe that such a territory, offered to human activity, could self-
regulate, resist the economic and political forces monopolizing it, remain without law and judge. 
This is why the object of this strategic review, once presented the state of the threat and our 
vulnerabilities, is to describe a robust cyber defence strategy and to expose the proposals that France 
could make for the international regulation of the cyberspace. It proposes, in this logic, to place at the 
heart of the French ambition in matters of cyber defence, seven main principles: 
1. give priority to the protection of our information systems 
2. adopt an active posture of discouraging of attacks and coordinated reaction 
3. fully exercise our digital sovereignty; 
4. provide an effective criminal response to cybercrime 
5. promote a shared culture of IT security 
6. contribute to a confident and secure digital Europe; 
7. act internationally in favour of collective and controlled governance of cyberspace. 
To follow the progress of the various recommendations, the cyber defence strategic review 
recommends setting up a semi-annual progress and implementation report at the expense of the 
SGDSN, sent to the cyber steering committee. 
  
Page 10 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1 Part I The dangers of the cyber world 
As the 2013 white paper on defence and national security underlined, "information systems are now 
a constitutive element of our societies"* Therefore, it is imperative that cyberspace remains a space 
of trust for public actors, businesses and individuals. If the digital space is a place of communication 
and exchanges favourable to progress, it has also become a place of confrontation. Offensive actions 
against state IT systems, critical infrastructures or large companies are daily, and we cannot always 
grasp their origin and understand the motivations, or even distinguish with certainty who, state or non-
state actors, are the sponsors and perpetrators. 
It is clear that most internal or international crises and inter or intra-state conflicts now have a cyber 
dimension. The growing exposure of our increasingly digital and interconnected societies to the risk 
of major cyber crises resulting from massive attacks or produced by systemic contaminations is 
obvious. 
To date, there have been few analyses of the cyber threat emanating from public sources. States, 
including France, are in fact reluctant to openly establish a diagnosis which would reveal their cyber 
defence capabilities in part. On the other hand, several private companies, notably publishers of 
antivirus solutions, have a great deal of data on their activity and the state of the cyber threat, and 
have produced relevant assessments. If these evaluations must be taken with caution insofar as they 
can serve commercial interests, once "objectified" they prove to be useful for forming an opinion and 
understanding certain concepts commonly disseminated. It will be referred to as necessary in the rest 
of the strategic review to understand, illustrate and better understand the dangers of the cyber world. 
The characteristics, the mode of propagation, the evolutions and the intensification of the cyber threat 
are factors whose understanding is indeed essential to build an effective national computer protection 
and defence apparatus and to consolidate a relevant cybersecurity model for society. 
Of state origin or name, with or without universal aim, emanating from organisations or simple 
individuals, the main characteristic of the cyber threat is its polymorphic character, It can attack in a 
determined way an entire country in the purpose of seriously harming it, as it can cause harm to 
everyone – users of computers, connected objects – indistinctly and with limited harmfulness. This is 
why this strategic review necessarily makes distinctions, focusing primarily on threats that can 
absolutely affect our defence and national security and those that can cause systemic effects on the 
functioning of our society. 
  
 
 
* National Defence and Security White Paper, 2013 (http://www.livreblancdefenceetsecurite.gouv.fr/). 
Page 11 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.1 Rapidly evolving threats 
The fact is known and shared: the threat of cyber origin continues to grow in its forms and its intensity. 
Computer attackers pursue four types of objectives, which are not mutually exclusive: espionage, illicit 
trafficking, destabilisation and sabotage. 
In pursuit of these objectives, computer attackers can be led to conduct both highly targeted 
operations and massive and indiscriminate actions. With various objectives, attacks also have very 
variable effects: they can be invisible – during a discrete exfiltration of data for example – or 
conversely completely paralyze the activity of the targeted entity; any damage caused may be easily 
reversible or, on the contrary, require lengthy reconstruction work. 
1.1.1 Computer espionage 
Penetrating the heart of the information systems they target, computer attacks have the dual 
advantage of being particularly effective for massively stealing data and being very difficult to attribute, 
which limits the risks of judicial prosecution. 
The objective of computer espionage is first of all within reach of the intelligence services of technically 
advanced countries which, for more than half a century, have developed communication interception 
systems for the purpose of economic, technological or political espionage. Computer espionage is 
only a transposition into the digital world of traditional intelligence activities. This form of espionage 
is, however, no longer the exclusive preserve of specialised services of States due to the diffusion of 
technologies and operational skills. 
The digital transformation of intelligence accelerated in the 2000s with the awareness by the public 
authorities, but also by certain companies, of the frighteningly effective performance of computer 
attacks in an increasingly digital society. Many countries have thus developed cyber offensive 
capabilities to gather, by means of computer attacks, information which has become more difficult to 
obtain by traditional means. The first large-scale cyberattacks revealed were in the United States and 
were aimed at looting industrial knowledge and skills. Besides the Atlantic, they were regularly 
attributed to China. Publicly unveiled in January 2010, Operation Aurora affected at least thirty 
American companies, including GOOGLE, MICROSOFT, YAHOO and ADOBE. In 2013, the 
American computer security company MANDIANT revealed an even more massive attack campaign 
that is attributed to a group of identified Chinese attackers. This group has penetrated more than 150 
institutions and manufacturers in Western countries for almost ten years. 
  
Page 12 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Today, computer attacks carried out for espionage purposes remain a major problem. Increasingly 
sophisticated, they constitute the largest number of major offensives that have affected our country 
in recent years. They are also in France at the origin of the main cyber defence operations led by the 
National Agency for Information Systems Security (ANSSI) to counter them. 
1.1.2 Cybercrime 
Until the mid-1990s, cybercrime was reduced to one-off actions by isolated hackers, for whom 
technical prowess itself, beyond any political or financial motivation, was often an end in itself. If these 
actions could involve intrusions into sensitive information systems, public or private, their effects 
remained very limited. The links between hackers and certain political regimes were then anecdotal, 
and their actions were mainly limited to "clearing" campaigns of Internet sites. 
During the 2000s, cybercrime networks gradually developed and became more professional. The 
appearance in 2010 of Bitcoin and then of other virtual currencies, associated with the establishment 
of the Tor anonymisation network, created the conditions conducive to a veritable explosion of 
cybercrime. If there are few precise statistics due to the low rate of reporting of cybercrimes, the 
multiplication of the number of computer attack tools on sale on the dark web (see glossary) testifies 
to this contagion. 
Cybercriminals now manage to capture very large sums of money. To do this, they use two main 
methods, real transpositions in the digital world of traditional criminal practices. The first consists in 
stealing money or sensitive information directly from businesses, banks or individuals, via the Internet, 
for example by stealing bank information, making fraudulent transfers, or by exfiltrating and then 
reselling precious information on the dark web. Data from companies and individuals represent a real 
financial windfall. Cybercriminal groups thus engage in major thefts such as that of the data of several 
billion accounts of the company YAHOO in 2013. The second method used by cybercriminals is to 
ransom their victims, either by threatening them to reveal information that they have previously 
exfiltrated from their information system, or by paralyzing their activity. If the denial of service 
technique, which allows a website to be temporarily unavailable, has long been used for this purpose, 
we are now seeing increasing use of ransomware (see glossary). Finally, beyond computer attacks, 
digital space is also used to anonymously conduct criminal activities (Internet sales of illegal products, 
dissemination of illegal content, etc.). 
In recent years, there has also been a gradual blurring of the line between the fight against cybercrime 
and the objectives of cyber defence, due either to the ambiguous nature of certain attacks or to the 
magnitude of their effects. We observe indeed the appearance of computer attacks carried out for the 
purposes of cybercrime but which, by their indiscriminate nature and their significant propagation 
capabilities, are likely to paralyze critical activities and therefore constitute a threat in terms of national 
security. In addition, the border between cybercriminal groups and states is increasingly difficult to 
establish, in particular due to the increasing use by cybercriminals of tools developed by intelligence 
agencies and then disclosed on the Internet following computer hacks. The black market for computer 
vulnerabilities interests both the intelligence services and cybercriminal groups. 
  
Page 13 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.1.3 Destabilisation 
The third type of objective pursued by computer attackers is destabilisation. Recently observed, 
especially during the last American and French presidential elections, but already identified in 
propaganda or disfigurement actions (see glossary) of political sites during conflicts or crises, this 
type of operation is linked to the internet and social media development. For a long time, the 
development of the internet and online services was seen as a factor favouring freedom of expression 
as well as the dissemination of knowledge and information. These new means of communication, a 
priori escaping from the control of the States and overcoming borders, were to favour the freedom of 
opinion. This vision is not wrong. The Internet thus played an undeniable role in the "Arab Spring" 
and, in some cases, it enabled whistle-blowers to usefully report certain abuses. 
New space of expression, the digital space is also exploited in a logic of political propaganda and 
propagation of ideologies with very questionable contents. Many extremist groups have appropriated 
not only the social media space but also the tools implemented by search engines or certain 
applications, with the aim of widely disseminating their ideas and reaching new targets. Online in 
March 2016, the experience of artificial intelligence developed by MICROSOFT, in order to learn from 
the behaviour of internet users how to interact with them on the social network Twitter, was quickly 
diverted from its goal, moreover questionable. Manipulated, this "artificial intelligence" has contributed 
to the increasingly frequent dissemination of racist, hateful and negationist messages. If, in this 
particular case, the cause and the impact of the diversion are measurable, it is not the same for the 
actions of influence carried out daily with the users of social networks. 
Propaganda and influence actions can easily be carried out on social networks, which, unlike 
traditional media, do not seek to endorse or systematically control the content to which they give 
access. Unverified facts, even deliberately false, can thus be massively relayed on the Internet, 
alongside information produced by the traditional media, without one being easily distinguishable from 
the other. Fake news even spreads much faster than actual facts, in particular because the only 
criterion for disseminating information on social networks is user engagement, which gives a premium 
to content that moves, shocks or causes react. Some operators, however, agree to cooperate with 
public authorities to hinder the dissemination of content relating to child pornography and terrorist 
propaganda. However, in the name of freedom of expression and their neutrality, if not for 
convenience, many other digital players give free rein to the dissemination of ideas or messages, 
even if they are incentives to hatred and crime. 
  
Page 14 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
All the classic tools of Internet advertising (targeted dissemination of messages, analysis of data 
exchanged on social networks, etc.) are very easily returned for propaganda and influence purposes. 
Basic techniques such as flooding (see glossary), which consists of massively distributing 
unnecessary information to reduce the visibility of targeted content, can support these operations. In 
addition to these methods it is also easy to manipulate opinion to fabricate information, to disfigure 
websites or to usurp social network accounts. The theft of data following a computer intrusion then 
their publication on the Internet, sometimes accompanied by false information, are increasingly used 
to sow doubt, to discredit an individual, a company, an organisation, a party, or even to destabilize a 
political process or a trial. 
In this context, some States have developed a cyber-strategy which is not limited to information 
systems but extends to the whole of the information sphere. Their action can go as far as censoring 
the content of exchanges in the digital space, or even carrying out influence actions. Thus, many 
countries have imposed draconian conditions on access providers in order to be able to control 
messages exchanged on the Internet and social networks and some also act outside their borders to 
influence public opinion. We are thus witnessing propaganda or destabilisation actions carried out on 
a large scale, carefully prepared and orchestrated, using various vectors such as the manipulation of 
social networks, exfiltration and then the massive disclosure of sensitive data on the Internet. Thus, 
during the 2016 American presidential campaign, the compromise of electronic messaging and the 
massive disclosure of confidential information concerning members of the Democratic team 
sufficiently disrupted the electoral process for President Barack OBAMA to openly accuse Russia of 
orchestrating the attacks targeting the Democratic candidate. FACEBOOK also confirmed to the US 
Congress in October 2017 that massive advertising campaigns had been bought by Russian actors 
on this network to influence the electoral debate in the United States, without this practice being 
deemed to be contrary to the regulations of the platform. 
The problem of digital propaganda, like propaganda in general, is tricky to deal with exhaustively and 
goes far beyond the scope of a cyber defence strategic review. This is why, in the matter, the present 
strategic review is interested only in the activities carried out by terrorist groups and foreign powers 
with the objective of provoking violent or destabilizing actions for our society. 
  
Page 15 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.1.4 Computer sabotage 
Computer attacks, the effects of which were once confined to the digital space, can now have 
potentially catastrophic impacts in the physical world. The digitisation of production systems and their 
increasing interconnection indeed expose them more and more to cyber risk. A computer attack is 
now likely to paralyze the activity of an entity not only by blocking its networks, but also by destroying 
its most critical equipment. These sabotage actions can have permanent or reversible, local or 
systemic consequences, and offer attackers an extremely wide range of effects. Recent attacks, some 
of which have served as tests, reveal a disturbing development, in particular by the nature of the 
targets targeted (industrial sites and critical infrastructures). 
The computer attack suffered by Estonia in April 2007 precipitated an awareness of this type of risk. 
This attack effectively paralyzed activities essential to the functioning of this country for several weeks: 
relying on the technique of distributed denial of service (DDOS, see glossary), the offensive blocked 
government websites as well as the media, political parties and banking activities; emergency 
numbers were even unavailable for short periods. The Estonian government then accused Russia of 
being behind the attack. The year 2010 and the revelations concerning the Stuxnet software, deployed 
to obstruct the Iranian uranium enrichment programme, constituted a turning point in the appreciation 
of the possible uses and the effectiveness of the cyberweapon. The first “computer worm” used to 
halt an industrial system, Stuxnet did not however use new techniques but a unique and extremely 
sophisticated combination of several techniques, including the exploitation of multiple zero-day 
vulnerabilities and the use of infection. This attack was based on careful preparation and precise 
knowledge of the industrial processes implemented in the Iranian nuclear programme. Less 
destructive and above all less explicit, but nonetheless highly demonstrative, the computer sabotage 
attack on the television channel TV5 Monde in April 2015 was the first action of this nature affecting 
French interests*. The restoration of the system, which justified an emergency intervention by the 
ANSSI, cost several million euros and took several days. Likewise, the NotPetya attack, which 
paralyzed many companies with interests in Ukraine in 2017, was particularly swift and violent. The 
attackers took control of the servers of the company that designs the M.E.doc software to insert a 
backdoor (see glossary) more than two but before launching this lightning attack. This software, which 
equips 80% of Ukrainian companies, allowed the attackers, through an update carrying destructive 
malicious software, to simultaneously contaminate many companies present in Ukraine and thus to 
paralyze their activity. Its spread to France, fortunately little affected, by business networks with 
Ukrainian subsidiaries, shows the danger of this type of massive and indiscriminate attacks which, in 
turn, are likely to paralyze essential activities of our country without that it is directly targeted. 
  
 
 
* The channel’s website and social media accounts were broadcasting jihadist propaganda, its image 
production system was unusable, and broadcasting was interrupted. TV5 Monde, which broadcasts in two 
hundred countries for fifty million viewers, had a black screen. 
Page 16 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Computer sabotage, with destructive consequences in the physical world, is today a reality. It 
represents the most worrying threat, whether it is aimed directly at our country as in the case of TV5 
Monde, or whether we suffer the collateral effects of it*. In addition, the possible collusion of terrorist 
groups and actors with strong capabilities techniques in this area, makes fear that one day a computer 
sabotage perpetrated by such movements is possible. These actions could be carried out entirely 
from abroad while ensuring greater protection for their authors. This hypothesis further highlights the 
need to strengthen cyber of the most critical infrastructures. 
 
Figure 1: Cyber sabotage action 
1.2 The main principles of action and the operating modes of computer attacks 
Most computer attacks follow general principles of action. The process followed by a computer 
attacker was modelled in 2011 by academic work sponsored by Lockheed Martin† and then referred 
to as the "cyber kill chain". If these first works deserve today to be deepened, understanding this 
process remains essential to apprehend the modes of action of the attackers and to propose parades. 
Schematically, a computer attack has four successive phases. It presupposes the development of a 
 
 
* Saint-Gobain was the victim in 2017 of the NotPetya ransomware which targeted the Ukraine. 
† Intelligence driven Computer Network Defence Informed by Analysis of Adversary Campaigns and Intrusion 
Kill Chains, by Eric M. Hutchins, Michael J. Cloppert and Rohan M. Amin, of Lockheed Martin Corp. 
Page 17 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
whole range of tools which will be used to penetrate the target system, to establish itself durably on 
its networks and to carry out all the necessary technical operations. It also relies on management and 
operating infrastructures using various compromised IT equipment, purchased or rented, which 
constitute a real IT complex. 
1.2.1 The four phases of an attack 
The development of a computer attack is articulated in four phases likely to be repeated as many 
times as necessary to achieve the desired objective. 
The first step is that of target recognition. It consists of a fingerprint that allows understanding the 
organisation of the victim's computer systems, identifying the technologies that the victim uses to 
better penetrate his system. This preparatory work can be done using data available in open source, 
for example on social networks such as LinkedIn. Intelligence services have more intrusive means to 
retrieve useful information, whether by human espionage or by interception techniques. Another way 
to collect this useful information is to perform a "port scan". This technique consists in sending a 
precise message to a targeted machine and observing the response made by this machine. This 
automatic response can indeed provide the attacker with valuable information on its configuration. 
Attackers can perform these port scans themselves, but also use databases of scans available on the 
Internet. If such databases are legitimately used by companies selling connected objects (which can 
be as varied as connected cameras or refrigerators) to obtain information on the use of their products, 
they can thus be hijacked by attackers to select targets. 
After the impression is taken, the attacker will try to break into the target system. To this end, it will 
seek to exploit certain vulnerabilities of this system. To attack a computer system, an attacker can do 
this in several ways. It often relies on this for a user that it leads to provide, for lack of vigilance, access 
to the targeted information system, for example by opening a trapped attachment, by clicking on a 
malicious link or by connecting an infected USB key. These phishing actions (see glossary) can be 
particularly effective. However, there are other more advanced intrusion techniques that require no 
user error and are done without their knowledge. This is the case, for example, of intrusions using 
trapped updates of legitimate software (case of the NotPetya attack) or cases where the attacker is 
able to modify the electronic communications exchanged between his target and the Internet, for 
example taking control of a router. 
  
Page 18 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
CVE vulnerabilities and zero-day vulnerabilities 
CVE vulnerabilities are vulnerabilities highlighted in computer programmes for which there 
are means of detection or even remediation (see glossary) developed by the editors of the 
product. They are identified by the year of their publication and a unique identifier number 
and allow, through a database maintained by the American association MITRE*, to know the 
impacted product, a description of the vulnerability and its consequences. This de facto 
standard makes it possible, for example, to make the link between a vulnerability and a patch 
or a security update. 
The zero-day vulnerabilities, unknown to the product publisher, are, however, formidable 
because they seem unstoppable for the victim. They are the subject of a fight between 
defenders and attackers concerning who will discover them first. In order to prevent their 
malicious exploitation, bonuses are provided, for example, during "bug bounty", that is to say 
competitions organised with the support of the publisher, for finding these "zero-day" 
vulnerabilities. And financially reward their discoverers. Attackers also engage in internal 
research or source from more or less legal platforms that act as intermediaries. This 
"uberisation" of the detection of security breaches is a phenomenon of significant magnitude 
because of the profits made by the sale of "zero-days". The latter now reach several hundred 
thousand dollars today, according to Zerodium's †  critical flaw specialist platform. The 
discovery of computer vulnerabilities does not always, far from it, lead to their correction. 
From the moment they are known, “zero-day” vulnerabilities are designated as “one-day” or 
CVE vulnerabilities. These known vulnerabilities are often still present on systems after their 
disclosure. The company EdgeScan, in its 2016 report, points out that the vulnerabilities on 
the systems are corrected on average two months after their disclosure, but not 
systematically. For older systems, some weaknesses may persist, especially if the system 
is no longer maintained by the publisher. 
  
 
 
* https://cve.mitre.org/ 
† Zerodium.com. This platform was founded by businessman Chaouki Bekrar. 
Page 19 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
 
Figure 2: Data exfiltration by sending a trapped email 
Once the intrusion has been completed, the attacker will install implants (see glossary) on the 
compromised machine to control it remotely. For this purpose, it will establish one or more connections 
to its attack infrastructure. He will try to be as discreet and stealthy as possible, often by encrypting 
his communications and camouflaging them in legitimate flows in order to remain undetectable. He 
will also be able to take control of the compromised equipment in order to maintain access despite 
reboots or updates to the system. At this advanced stage of its attack, the intruder can further extend 
its hold on the network and the databases of its target. This process, which corresponds to the third 
phase of an attack, is often called lateralisation (see glossary). It will allow the attacker to master the 
infiltrated system durably and to definitively take possession of it. 
The final phase of an attack consists of the exploitation of the compromised system, that is to say the 
triggering of the effects sought by the attacker. It can last a few seconds in the case of a punctual 
exfiltration of data or computer sabotage or conversely extend for several years for intelligence 
operations. It can be more or less automated. The attacker can also, during this particularly sensitive 
stage, monitor if it is not detected and, in case of doubt, erase the most visible parts of its intrusion to 
return later. 
It should be noted that sophisticated computer attacks require a fairly long preparation phase, often 
several months, to trigger effects which are almost instantaneous. The intrusion phase requires time, 
both to understand the architecture of the target system and to take complete control of it, including 
the backup network. The offensive against TV5 Monde in 2015 is a textbook case. It took place over 
three months, from the infiltration of networks to the blocking of emissions, in early April 2015. 
  
Page 20 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.2.2 Attacker's infrastructure 
Carrying out a computer attack requires the possession of certain technical capabilities and 
infrastructures 
• a "cyberweapon" (fault detectors, implants, communication channels and piloting tools); 
• a command-control infrastructure, grouping together all of the servers controlled by the 
attacker and used to control its malware; 
• an operating infrastructure to exfiltrate and analyse data. 
To be able to be used consistently during a computer attack, the various malware used must be 
integrated, for example within a specific attack tool for a specific purpose. 
With the advent of the web in the late 1990s, attack tools that could be used by non-specialists, known 
as “script kiddies” (see glossary), appeared. These tools, whose ancestors are called AOHell, 
Metasploit or even MPack, are mainly of American, Russian or Chinese origin. Their proliferation has 
favoured the proliferation of good level cyberattacks. Particularly well designed and modular, they 
make it very easy to integrate new functionalities or exploit new vulnerabilities. More advanced 
versions of these tools have been sold on the market for a few years under the guise of "security 
testing" which increases their level of performance and their harmfulness. 
The use of this malware requires an IT infrastructure allowing it to be managed in a discreet manner: 
the attacker's command-control infrastructure. The attacker can, for example, rely on “zombie 
machines” which he has taken control of or compromise poorly secured servers to use them as relays. 
Anonymisation networks like Tor can allow it to discreetly create a logical link between its equipment 
and that of its targets. By choosing the geographic locations of the relays he uses well, the attacker 
can ensure that it will be very difficult to go back to him. In the most complex cases, this infrastructure 
can consist of thousands of compromised devices which can be used alternately or simultaneously. 
The infrastructure of the Mirai attack, which paralyzed several Internet services in 2016 for a few 
hours, relied on a network of several hundred thousand IP cameras to carry out a massive denial of 
service attack. 
In addition to the command-control capabilities, the attacker can use a different operating 
infrastructure to exfiltrate and process data, or to collect ransoms. This infrastructure must be discreet 
and guarantee the transmission rates necessary for the volume of information extracted. Attackers 
can use exploitation means similar to those implemented for command-control infrastructures. Other 
solutions are possible. Cybercriminals frequently use financial conversion chains in various 
cryptocurrencies, making traceability of ransoms almost impossible. All of these methods, alternately 
or simultaneously used, make it very difficult to investigate cyberattacks and even more problematic 
attribution in the light of the only technical elements available. 
  
Page 21 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.2.3 Structuring the threat 
During the 1990s, many hackers or groups of American, German and Russian hackers made 
themselves known by their exploits or when they were arrested. However, this form of activism 
remained the concern of some specialists. From the 2000s, the somewhat "romantic" vision of the 
solitary hacker will give way to the observation of a global structuring of the threat around certain 
groups of attackers who will both specialize and capitalize on their skills, their tools and their operating 
modes. This is how, in 2010, the concept of Advanced Persistent Threat (APT – see glossary*) 
appeared to characterize a set of tools and techniques used by a structured group, whether state or 
private. 
State involvement is also profoundly transforming the nature of the cyber threat. This is now embodied 
by powerful and structured public and private organisations which replace the small groups of experts 
from the beginning. Certain countries, seeking to anonymize their actions in cyberspace, delegate the 
task of carrying them out to private entities. For example, many anti-virus publishers today publicly 
link around 20 to China: 
• APT1, the first group known by this name Since 2006, this group is at the origin of the 
compromise of computer systems in more than 140 companies in many industrial sectors 
aiming to steal sensitive data, whether acts on patents for manufacturing processes, 
commercial strategies or even contracts content. After having methodically penetrated the 
computer networks of these companies, sometimes lurking there for several years, this 
group has managed to regularly exfiltrate considerable masses of information. To achieve 
this, APT1 used a thousand servers, industrializing both the intrusion phases but above all 
the operating phases. Several hundred people would be employed to maintain this 
infrastructure and to guide the search for documents, their translations and their exploitation. 
• The attacks on TV5 Monde (APT28†) and NotPetya are another illustration of the structuring 
of groups of attackers under the impetus of a State. The APT28 group, which has been 
raging since 2008, is said to have successively attacked institutions in Georgia and eastern 
Europe, as well as NATO and armaments fairs like Eurosatory. Oriented towards data theft 
at first, APT28 then specialised in influence thanks to the publication of exfiltrated data. The 
United States has attributed to the APT28 group the exfiltration of data from the Democratic 
Party during the 2016 American elections. Likewise, the World Anti-Doping Agency linked 
to this group the theft in 2016 of data relating to high-performance athletes who 'she owned. 
  
 
 
* Designation introduced by the Mandiant Company. 
† Also known as Fancy Bear or Pawn Storm. 
Page 22 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The Lazarus group, linked by many security actors to North Korea, has been carrying out large-scale 
operations since 2009. After targeting infrastructure in South Korea, it became famous for attacking 
the security systems. information from the company SONY where he had access to films not yet 
broadcast but above all to the personal data of all employees. Later, this APT seems to have been 
directed towards financial institutions, casinos and cryptocurrency systems in order to steal as much 
money as possible. The link made between the Wannacry ransomware and this group, notably by the 
English government and then by the American, Canadian and Australian governments, only confirms 
the new directions of this APT: recovering cash on behalf of the North Korean government. Difficult 
under these conditions to make a distinction between this APT, supposedly governmental and whose 
motivations seem only financial, and the group of cybercriminals named Carbanak who, between 
2013 and today, is suspected of having stolen no less than 'a billion dollars by attacking more than a 
hundred banks in more than 30 countries. 
The table below presents a non-exhaustive history of attacks attributed to APTs. For its part, France 
has chosen not to make the elements available to its public. 
  
Page 23 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Name Type of attack Effect of attack Target Period 
Titan Rain Espionage Extraction of a lot of information American and 
British 
administrations 
and companies 
2003 to 2006 
Shady Rat Espionage Data extraction targeting more than 72 entities 
mainly in the United States 
Governments or 
associations 
2006 to 2009 
Comment Crew Espionage Extraction of sensitive information from more than 
141 high-tech companies 
Global 
companies 
2006 to 2013 
Bronze Night Sabotage DDOS on many Estonian government and industrial 
websites 
Estonia April 27, 2007 
DarkHotel Espionage Passwords stolen from luxury hotel customers in 
Asia 
Luxury hotels in 
Asia 
2007 to 2014 
Operation Aurora Espionage Looting for two years of sensitive information American web 
companies 
2009 to mid-2010 
Stuxnet Sabotage Malfunctions and premature wear of the centrifuges 
at the Iranian uranium enrichment plant in Natanz 
Iran June 23, 2009, to 
May 13, 2010 
Shamoon Sabotage Erasing more than 30,000 computer hard drives with 
a file containing an image of a burning American flag 
National Saudi 
Company 
Hydrocarbons 
(SAUDI 
ARAMCO) 
August 15, 2012, to 
September 1, 2012 
Page 24 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Name Type of attack Effect of attack Target Period 
Yahoo Cybercrime or 
espionage 
The attackers, who first entered YAHOO's systems 
in 2013 and then in 2014, stole information from 3 
billion users. Two first sales of this data were 
detected in August 2017, but the motivations of the 
group or groups are not clearly identified. 
YAHOO 2013 and 2014 
Carbanak Cybercrime By taking control of many banks and financial 
institutions (more than a hundred), the attackers 
managed to steal up to US$ 1 billion by fraudulently 
making transfers and cash withdrawals from 
distributors 
banks 2013 to 2014 
Sony Picture Entertainment Destabilisation Theft of numerous data and disclosure of films not 
yet released and confidential data 
Sony Picture 
Entertainment 
November 2014 
TV5 Monde Sabotage Paralysis of all the broadcasting means of the TV5 
Monde channel for 2 days. 
TV5 World April 8 to 9, 2015 
Democratic Party Destabilisation Theft and disclosure of numerous emails from the 
Democratic Party (20,000 emails) and attempt to 
destabilize the Democratic candidate in the 2016 US 
presidential elections 
American 
Democratic Party 
Summer 2015 to 
July 2016 
Bank of Bangladesh Cybercrime Theft, through fraudulent transfers, of US$ 81 million. Bank of 
Bangladesh 
February 2016 
Dyn Sabotage The attack via a DDOS blocked the services of the 
company DYN, making the internet unavailable for a 
few hours. 
Internet October 21, 2016 
WannaCry Cybercrime Encryption of over 300,000 computers and ransom 
demand for data recovery 
Not targeted May 12 to 15, 2017 
Page 25 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Name Type of attack Effect of attack Target Period 
NotPetya Sabotage Destruction of many computer systems using 
Ukrainian accounting softwareME.DOC 
Ukraine June 27, 2017 
Figure 3: History of attacks attributed to PTAs 
 
Page 26 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.3 Evermore vulnerable systems 
The increase in the general level of the threat is only slightly compensated today by the improvement 
in the level of security of the systems. Faced with the explosion in the number of attacks, awareness 
of IT risk remains very insufficient today. In a context marked by the massive digitisation of data and 
the growing interconnectivity of networks, securing computer systems is becoming an imperative 
and a crucial issue for our societies, which are now exposed to real systemic risks. 
1.3.1 An insufficient state of security 
The first malware closely followed the creation, in 1969, of the Arpanet (American military network, 
ancestor of the Internet). The Creeper software, from 1971, is thus the first programme to be 
replicated from server to server with no more malicious intention than displaying on the screen a 
parasitic message "I'm the creeper, catch me if you can". 
During the 1980s, the development of home computing, with Apple II computers and the first PCs 
running MS-DOS, encouraged the proliferation of malware, which however was not yet a real 
danger. The damage caused was limited and often unintentional. Like the denial of service caused 
by the Morris worm (cf. glossary), from the name of its inventor who was also the first condemned 
under the American law "Computer Fraud and Abuse Act" adopted by the Congress in 1986*. It was 
also in the late 1980s that the first antiviruses appeared. The companies that developed them at the 
time – McAfee, Symantec, TrendMicro and Kaspersky – are still the leaders in the field today (see 
Annex 6). 
It was at the turn of the 1990s and 2000s, with the rise of the web, that really toxic software appeared, 
such as the Iloveyou worm created by two Filipino students or the Klez malware which infected 
computers by the millions by spreading via the Internet messaging for their victims. In response to 
these large-scale attacks, the Clinton administration took a series of measures to strengthen the 
computer security of the United States administration and launched a US$ 1.5 billion plan to better 
ensure the security of federal agencies. In parallel, the first Snort detection probe was proposed as 
an “open source” project by Martin Roesch. The latter then founded, on the basis of this project, the 
company SourceFire, which became the first global company in the field to be acquired by Cisco in 
2013. 
Since then, we have been witnessing a race between the invention of malware and antivirus, 
between the deployment of increasingly sophisticated attacks and the hardening of protections for 
computer systems. Often behind the advances of the attackers, computer defences remain too 
weak. Few companies or administrations today have robust and secure "state of the art" information 
systems. There are three main reasons for this: the often-insufficient initial level of protection of IT 
equipment and software offered for sale, the lack of security updates for older products and, finally, 
the insufficient consideration by cybersecurity companies as a strategic component of their digital 
transformation. 
  
 
 
* In France, the Godfrain Law of January 5, 1988 was the first law relating to computer fraud and computer 
intrusion (Law n. 88-19). This law notably introduced the concept of an Automated Data Processing System 
(STAD). 
Page 27 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.3.2 Risks associated with digital transformation 
The computerisation of systems is not a recent phenomenon. The first industrial programmable logic 
controllers appeared in the late 1970s to meet the needs of car manufacturers to modernize and 
automate their production chains. This equipment made it possible to make the link between the 
digital world and the analogue world. This is why they have imposed themselves in all production 
chains, in modern buildings to manage, for example, air conditioning systems, or on-board aircraft 
and ships in propulsion or navigation functions. Mass deployment of on-board computing devices 
began in 1980 when GENERAL MOTORS was the first automaker to use a processor with 50,000 
lines of code to improve engine performance. It was quickly imitated by its competitors and, today, 
there are commonly found on motor vehicles between 20 and 100 processors running several million 
lines of code. 
Having become ubiquitous in all systems, IT products are no exception to the laws of the market. 
However, these tend to replace, in a logic of cost control, specific products for more versatile 
products whose customisation is easy but which include, sui generis, many superfluous functions. 
It is therefore not surprising to find services such as a "web server” in industrial machines used in 
an environment that is completely isolated, simply because the generic component used included 
this functionality. This trend is also reflected in a technological convergence which tends to place 
the same computer components in systems, however very different. This kind of situation results in 
increased vulnerability of the systems because potential attackers can have easy access on the 
market to the computer components in question to prepare their misdeeds. 
The other notable evolution of our systems is the increasing interconnection of which they are the 
object. Like what can be observed with the installation of smart electric meters, many systems 
present in everyday life are now interconnected via the Internet or specific connections in order to 
facilitate and reduce the cost of their operation and allow new services. The functioning of certain 
systems is even sometimes dependent on their good connection with an external server. Interrupting 
it is therefore enough to render the system inoperative. Their interconnection is a new source of 
vulnerability* which offers a potential attacker two opportunities to exploit: 
  
 
 
* For this reason, solid work to secure ENEDIS electric meters has, for example, been carried out in close 
collaboration with ANSSI. 
Page 28 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• it offers an infrastructure, or “botnet”* (cf. glossary), allowing to carry out massive attacks 
like that operated by the Mirai malware which, by taking control of a set of video cameras 
connected to the Internet, has achieved a massive denial of service on part of the web; 
• it exposes the systems to a risk of computer attack via their connection to an external 
network. For example, American researchers succeeded in 2015 in taking control of a 
vehicle from a smartphone and the CIA was able to spy on targets using cameras and 
microphones incorporated into televisions. 
If it makes it possible to envisage an improvement in the living conditions of the populations and a 
better management of resources, the prospect of the establishment of smart cities and territories in 
which will be superimposed and will be interconnected the energy grids, electronic communications, 
transport, water and waste management will significantly increase the opportunities available to 
attackers. In this regard, the ambitious choice to make the French capital a digital city in 2024 on 
the occasion of the Olympic Games must be accompanied by a fundamental reflection on the 
security of information systems that will support the digital transition in Paris and event management. 
Substrate for these future deployments, the clouds that will allow the collection of data from these 
connected cities will constitute potential targets, as will the algorithms that will process this data. 
The number of connected objects will be in the tens of billions by 2020 (estimates of this number 
will vary from 26 to 212 billion†). These objects will facilitate everyday life while bringing new 
functionalities at reduced costs. The "Internet of Things" that they will constitute may, however, be 
the target of computer attacks with consequences going as far as the loss of human lives when, for 
example, connected objects used in the health field are targeted. This risk is compounded by the 
fact that many manufacturers do not secure their connected objects in order to reduce the 
development cost and speed up their commercialisation. If the current development dynamic is 
maintained, "botnets" of connected objects will thus massively supplement the traditional "botnets" 
of already existing computers, further weakening the level of security in the digital space. 
An awareness of these dangers appears necessary. It should then quickly lead to the 
implementation of a real strategy for the development of connected objects with a minimum level of 
security. Otherwise, user confidence will deteriorate, and the future of digital will become more 
uncertain. The cyber defence strategic review presents several avenues in this in its third part. 
  
 
 
* Networks of compromised robots that are in the hands of a group of attackers to conduct their attacks. 
† Source: “Cyberattaques. Prévention-réactions : rôle des États et des acteurs privés”, Karine Bannelier, 
Théodore Christakis, in Les Cahiers de la revue Défense Nationale, April 2017. 
Page 29 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.3.3 The existence of a systemic risk 
Apart from traditional attacks on bank cards, the first major computer attacks on the financial system 
were carried out by hijacking the Swift* system. This system, which allows exchanges between 
banking establishments by guaranteeing the authenticity of transactions and by archiving them, is 
one of the pillars necessary for the proper functioning of the international financial system. The 
attacks carried out by the APT Lazarus Group or Carbanak have enabled them to steal up to a billion 
dollars, may seem derisory if we compare their earnings to the amount of daily transactions carried 
out by Swift (every day, more than 8 million transactions totalising billions of dollars). For their 
authors, they nevertheless turned out to be very lucrative and could give ideas to other criminal 
groups, even to countries, which could by this means recover financing from carrying out clandestine 
activities or even make disappear part of the assets. financial of their opponents or opponents. In 
this context, the confidence placed in the current system of financial transactions by market players 
could be significantly degraded, and the risk of an entire system collapse cannot be ruled out. 
Supply chain attacks, such as the NotPetya malware in 2017, fall under other scenarios that can 
also produce cascading effects beyond control. These attacks are proving to be very effective since 
the trap arrives at the target via the usual supply chain or through legitimate system updates, which 
does not arouse suspicion. If it is effective, this mass trapping presents two major risks: 
• that of producing collateral damage which can itself generate a response and an 
uncontrolled escalation due to an imprecise initial targeting; 
• that of seeing another group of attackers discover the vulnerabilities introduced and divert 
them for their own use, which may be against the user of the device†. 
Serious damage to the credibility of the international financial system, the inability of attackers to 
circumscribe in time and space the collateral damage of their attacks, constitute the seeds of a major 
systemic risk for the functioning of the economy and society. 
  
 
 
* Swift is administered by the company of the same name: Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication. 
† Thus in 2005, following the sale of the "personal computer" branch of IBM to the Chinese company 
LENOVO, several Anglo-Saxon intelligence services decided to ban the use of computers from this brand 
within their organisation fearing their trapping by the Chinese State. 
Page 30 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
1.3.4 The growing cyber threat 
States today are confronted with an evolution of the cyber threat, revolving around three factors: 
• the danger of the threat, under the effect of the multiplication of actors, the increase in the 
offensive capabilities of certain foreign powers, the proliferation of computer weapons and 
the trivialisation of attack techniques; 
• the overlapping of cybercrime and national security issues. The tools traditionally used for 
fraud and extortion purposes, such as ransomware, can cause damage to the information 
systems of the State and operators in charge of critical infrastructures, thus paralyzing the 
continuity of their operations. activities. This has been observed in particular with the 
effects of the WannaCry attack on the British healthcare system; 
• increased exposure of our society to the threat due to its wider digitisation and the large-
scale use of connected objects (cf. 1.3.2). 
In addition to the countless computer spy operations that are very regularly detected and the 
well-documented risks of data looting or denial of access, acts of blocking or sabotaging 
computer systems (which may also be linked to cybercrime), are more and more often noted. 
It is likely that a computer attack of this nature will one day have lethal consequences. 
Our democratic societies are more and more often confronted with the misuse of the Internet 
and social networks for the purpose of manipulating opinion and institutional destabilisation. 
More and more attacks combining different modes of action and seeming to pursue several 
ends, reveal a work of planning and infiltration upstream led by actors with advanced 
capabilities. 
We are also collectively confronted with the rise of a kind of IT Golem, which, from the 
manipulation of misappropriated vectors (zombie computers, compromised connected objects, 
etc.), is likely to trigger unpredictable phenomena of great magnitude., ranging for example 
from the disclosure of a considerable amount of data to the electric blackout of a city. 
Faced with the evolving threat, it is necessary for our country to consolidate and make 
consistent its objectives and its cyber defence capabilities. 
Towards a cybernetic "Far West"? 
Few prospective studies exist in the cyber domain, whether they concern future 
technological developments or employment doctrines. The evolutions imagined at present 
are often linked to the medium-term appearance of the quantum computer, which could 
give the states in their possession a significant superiority in the field of security by allowing 
them to "break" the algorithms. of current cryptography. It is, however, difficult to give a 
date, even an approximate one, of the entry into service of such computers, which 
supposes the advent of a real technological revolution, probable but to this day still 
uncertain. The first copies of these machines existing today are still far from what would be 
necessary to bring true supremacy. 
  
Page 31 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
On the other hand, it is certain that the threat will worsen in the next decade, resulting in a 
more dangerous and less stable cyberspace, where computer attacks will be 
commonplace, forcing public institutions, businesses and individuals to protect themselves 
more strongly than today. This scenario is described by the Center for Long Term 
cybersecurity at the University of Berkeley as "the new normal." In this context, we can 
make the choice of greater control of risks, thanks to a reinforced cyber defence and a 
more robust hygiene of cybersecurity in our society, or on the contrary to let us drift towards 
a kind of "Far-West" cybernetics. 
This future is less conditioned in the immediate future by cyber technology than by the 
development of new hardened self-defence applications that take security issues more 
effectively into account. In this respect, the level of protection and control of the Internet of 
Things and artificial intelligence appears to be a decisive element for the security of our 
society. 
1.4 How to resist attacks? 
Under the double effect of an increasing threat of cyber origin and an increased vulnerability of our 
information systems, the ways and means of ensuring our cyber defence are now essential issues 
for our society*. 
After having posed the main challenges in terms of governance and risk analysis (1.4.1), this 
strategic review highlights the need to take security into account throughout the life cycle of systems 
(1.4.2) and be familiar with the technologies available to deal with the threat (1.4.3), then discusses 
active defence techniques (1.4.4). 
1.4.1 Integrate cybersecurity issues into organisations at a good level 
With several years of hindsight, it appears that taking into account cyber threats and implementing 
appropriate countermeasures within a public or private entity is only truly effective if they fall under 
the highest level of responsibility. Thus, the level of risk relating to information systems, taking into 
account the protection measures put in place, must at all times be known and accepted by the 
management of the entity. To assist in this follow-up, the latter may appoint an information systems 
security manager, possibly assisted by a group of personnel constituting an SSI functional chain. 
By virtue of the principle of separation of roles, it is essential that this functional chain is not subject 
to the hierarchical authority of the management of the entity's information systems. In addition, its 
role in monitoring the security level of the information system and preparing the related decisions 
should in no case lead to the disempowerment of the entity's management level. 
  
 
 
* A mission on artificial intelligence was entrusted to deputy Cédric Villani (see Part 3). 
Page 32 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
To drive their digital transformation, companies or government departments set up a specific 
organisation with a manager responsible for driving these developments. These digital directors or 
“chief digital officer” are often integrated into the management committee and rely on traditional IT 
departments to lead both the evolution of digital systems in the company, the digitalisation of 
different business processes, the acculturation of staff to this digitalisation but also to transform the 
"Business models" of their entity by taking full advantage of the opportunities offered by digital. Also, 
when such managers exist within a structure, it is essential to also entrust them with the 
responsibility for the cybersecurity of their project and especially the analysis of the associated risks. 
The integration of cybersecurity elements from the reflection stages and at a high level makes it 
possible to assess ab initio the risks of the different options of the digital transition and to 
considerably improve security, often at negligible additional cost. 
1.4.2 Take security into account throughout the life cycle of information systems 
Faced with increasingly advanced and evolving attacks, the concept prevailing for many years of a 
defence based solely on perimeter prevention measures has demonstrated its limits. Thus, whatever 
the quality of the preventive measures implemented – which remain all their relevance anyway – it 
is now unrealistic to consider that an information system will remain strictly tight against attacks. On 
the contrary, it should be taken as an axiom that a motivated attacker will always end up gaining 
ground within the information system. Adequate defence must, therefore, be extended to the entire 
information system to be protected, in a defence-in-depth logic, and incorporate a section devoted 
to detecting and reacting to attacks. this. 
More fundamentally, the consideration of security must be effective at all stages of the life cycle of 
an information system, which can be schematically described according to four phases (cf. appendix 
8): design and development phase; system security acceptance and verification phase; operational 
life phase of the system with, in terms of security, a double challenge of maintaining security and 
supervising in order to detect attacks; reaction phase to possible attacks. 
Failure to take security issues into account in one of these stages greatly impairs the ability to 
guarantee system security throughout its life. Thus, it is illusory to pretend to achieve a good level 
of protection by a simple audit and the correction of the vulnerabilities identified on this occasion, if 
the right technical and organisational choices were not adopted from the design of the system. 
Likewise, the absence of security oversight of a system, whatever its initial level of security, can only 
ultimately lead to an illusion of security. 
  
Page 33 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Each phase of the system life cycle calls for specific skills, both technical and methodological, and 
is associated with a number of good practices. The development of these good practices also 
requires, at each stage, regularly updated knowledge of available technologies and the state of the 
threat. 
Finally, the sequence of these different phases must be considered as a cycle rather than as a linear 
sequence, since the reaction to an identified attack must naturally lead to a review of the system 
design and iterative improvement in its security. This cyclical sequence of stages in the life cycle is 
all the more justified in the case of development structured according to so-called "agile" methods, 
which see successive numerous development cycles and the related security stages, including the 
absence of identified attacks. 
 
Figure 4: The life-cycle of information system security 
1.4.3 Know the technologies and the threat 
A security approach can only be effective if it is fuelled, at all stages, by regularly updated knowledge 
of the technologies and the threat. Maintaining such knowledge requires a significant investment, 
which is not justified for the majority of entities deploying secure information systems. This 
knowledge should therefore in most cases be sought from specialised administrations, or from 
cybersecurity service providers. 
Technically, the cumulative integration of feedback from the design and implementation of secure 
information systems must first be achieved. It is then a matter of having an in-depth knowledge of 
the available technologies and understanding their security mechanisms, their contributions, their 
limits and their vulnerabilities. An active watch, covering both the new solutions put on the market 
as well as the vulnerabilities identified in the existing solutions must be conducted and, if necessary, 
be supplemented by mock-up and test actions. The early identification of the main technological 
breakthroughs or changes in uses must also be sought in a logic of anticipation, which requires a 
close relationship with the field of academic research. 
  
Page 34 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Knowing threats must, for its part, integrate a precise and up-to-date identification of the tools used 
by attackers in order to deduce therefrom, in particular through the reverse engineering of samples 
of malicious code, characteristic markers likely to feed the attack detection solutions. It also aims to 
describe the main adverse operating modes, with a double challenge of identifying the preferred 
targets of these operating modes, and of understanding for each of them the processes and 
techniques implemented at each stage of a cyberattack, from the reconnaissance phase to the 
operational phase. Knowledge of the threat is fed by a capacity to monitor and analyse information 
available in open sources, by information from the supervision and detection means implemented 
within the various protected information systems, and by the result of analyses conducted in 
response to attacks. These elements can be usefully supplemented by comparable reports and 
analyses made available by third-party organisations. The sustainable development of knowledge 
requires an ability to carefully capitalize on a vast body of information, the life cycle and rules for 
sharing with third parties must be carefully managed. 
1.4.4 Consider a mastered active defence 
To complement current cybersecurity systems, new, more active and aggressive techniques are 
starting to be implemented in an increasingly systematic manner. Between a purely passive defence 
and resolutely offensive measures, they are grouped in the category of excessive active defence. 
The techniques known as “honey pots” thus aim to attract attackers to fake targets so that they 
reveal their tools, which will then make it easier to spot them. This technique, which is widely used 
by researchers, allows them to observe a wide range of malware. 
Another technique, known as “sink-holing” (cf. glossary), consists in observing the actions of an 
attacker by diverting the flows going up towards its command-control infrastructure to a controlled 
server. This type of operation, often carried out by antivirus publishers, allows them to observe the 
attacker for several years and to understand the intended targets and the objectives pursued. 
However, during the time of the observation, the attacker pursues his misdeeds, which questions 
the attitude of the industrialist who is aware of an offence and decides alone to let it take place to 
obtain knowledge about attackers which he will then develop for his benefit. 
  
Page 35 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
To stop an attack, victims may also be tempted to destroy the attacker's infrastructure by deleting 
the servers they use for their command-control infrastructure. These actions can be done by judicial 
means by "seizing" the means complained of. This approach undertaken by MICROSOFT with the 
support of the FBI has enabled them in recent years to remove many "botnets" from several 
hundreds of thousands of machines. But other techniques without legal basis are also used to render 
the infrastructure of an attacker inoperative. 
The victim may also be tempted to counterattack using the same techniques as his attacker. This 
practice, in contradiction with national and international law, called "hackback", can be used to 
recover stolen data, destroy the attackers' system, or even steal the means at their disposal. This 
mode of action, which seems to have already been implemented in a few cases, leads to an 
inevitable escalation, collateral damage being more than probable and the attacker may himself 
want to retaliate again. 
All these techniques raise the need to clarify international law in this area to avoid inextricable 
situations or uncontrolled escalation. 
1.5 International regulation still too nascent 
The previously presented picture of an ever more structured threat and of systems made more 
vulnerable by digitisation and their increasing interconnectivity is part of an international context 
where no multilateral agreement has yet been found to establish an architecture and rules for 
common security governing relations between states and between private and public actors in the 
digital age. 
1.5.1 International negotiations on the regulation of cyberspace at a turning point 
Cyberspace is not entirely devoid of norms and rules, to the extent that those of international law or 
the main principles which govern relations between States apply to them. Thus, the negotiations, 
under the aegis of the United Nations, of the “group of government experts on cybersecurity” (GGE), 
organised in different formats five times between 2004 and 2017, made it possible to recognize, 
from 2013, the applicability of international law, and in particular of the Charter of the United Nations, 
to cyberspace, then to consolidate, in 2015, a base of voluntary commitments of good conduct for 
States in this field. These “responsible behaviour standards” revolve around several main principles 
or objectives. In order to facilitate cooperation and reduce the risk of misunderstandings, it is 
therefore recommended that States show transparency on their organisation and their national 
posture in terms of cybersecurity and adopt a cooperative attitude towards victim countries attacks 
from within their own territory, especially when the attack targets critical infrastructure. In order to 
strengthen the overall resilience of the digital space, each State is also encouraged to strengthen 
its own cybersecurity at the national level, and in particular that of its most sensitive systems, such 
as those of critical infrastructures. Another objective is to combat the proliferation of malicious IT 
tools and to preserve the integrity of the digital supply chain. It may also be recalled that it appeared 
important for the States participating in these negotiations to undertake, outside the context of 
military operations, not to damage the critical infrastructure of another State or to deteriorate their 
capacity to provide their service to the public. 
  
Page 36 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
During the last round of GGE negotiations 2016-2017, France made proposals to its partners to 
deepen this work and clarify all of these standards, in particular on the prohibition of hackback 
practices (counter-cyberattack see glossary) by private actors or the imposition of export controls 
for malicious cyber tools. These proposals were generally the subject of a consensus, but 
negotiations failed on the question– uncorrelated – of the modalities of application of international 
law to the conduct of States in cyberspace. 
This failure of negotiations within the UN GGE is the sign of a fundamental divergence in perception, 
among the different countries, of the international security architecture that should govern relations 
between states in the digital age. In the short and medium terms, this incompatibility signals the end 
of negotiations at the UN on the responsible behaviour of states in cyberspace. 
The failure of this last round of negotiations in no way calls into question the standards and principles 
agreed in previous years. In addition, it must not put an end to the efforts of France and the 
international community to promote standards of behaviour and confidence-building measures in 
favour of the stability and international security of cyberspace. 
Beyond relations between states alone, a major regulatory effort remains to be carried out in 
particular around the activities of the private sector. The emergence of digital technology as a new 
tool and space for confrontation indeed gives this sector, and particularly to certain systemic actors, 
an unprecedented role and responsibilities in the preservation of peace and international security. 
On these various subjects, the States will not be able to create and impose rules alone on all the 
actors of cyberspace. In recent years, several initiatives aimed at promoting certain visions of 
international regulation of cyberspace, using a holistic approach integrating actors from the private 
sector and civil society have also emerged. 
Launched in February 2017 by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, the Global 
Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace aims to develop original proposals for international 
standards, with the aim of ''encouraging responsible behaviour by state and non-state actors in 
cyberspace”. The Commission is made up of twenty-six commissioners (including a French one) 
representing a wide variety of geographic regions and stakeholders (governments, industry, 
technical community, civil society) and chosen according to their legitimacy to express themselves 
on the issues. different aspects of cyberspace. At the Global Conference on Cyberspace held in 
New Delhi in November 2017, this Commission called on state and non-state actors to commit to 
protecting the "public heart of the internet". 
  
Page 37 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In addition, private companies also intend to take part in these debates. MICROSOFT thus, from 
2014, proposed to States a set of behavioural standards relating to the various aspects of 
international cyberspace security (fight against proliferation, responsible management of 
vulnerabilities, assistance in the event of a crisis) before proposing in 2016 that these standards are 
included in a “Geneva Digital Convention”. MICROSOFT is also at the origin of a set of behavioural 
rules for the private sector (the TechAccord). 
1.5.2 Theoretical foundations under construction 
In this “post-GGE” world in which we now live, where international peace and security in the digital 
society are still under construction, and the respective roles to be played by States and private 
actors yet to be defined, the theoretical foundations of cyber defence are still under discussion, both 
within countries and within various international organisations. Several major trends emerge, 
however. 
The classification of threats and the severity of computer attacks appears, first of all, as a shared 
necessity. The United States has developed an apprehension grid for cyberattacks which, if it cannot 
be transposed without adaptation to all countries with regard to the specificities of their cyber 
defence organisations, constitutes an interesting reference. 
In addition, technological advances call into question some of the “state prerogatives”. The 
extraterritoriality of the data also calls for the structuring of new theoretical foundations. 
Finally, the question of the application of the concept of deterrence to cyberspace continues to be 
the subject of numerous debates at the international level. France reserves, for its part, the term of 
deterrence in the military nuclear field. As the ultimate guarantee of our sovereignty, deterrence is 
based on the unique nature of nuclear weapons. The cyberweapon cannot exercise the very specific 
restraint or deterrent effect observed and maintained with nuclear deterrence because of its 
profoundly different effects. Finally, the "grammar" of nuclear deterrence is unique and does not 
apply to cyber actions. 
The concept of "cyber deterrence" advanced by some has at least three limits: 
  
Page 38 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• first, any act of deterrence is based on clear and credible rhetoric. However, in terms of 
cyber, publicly revealing its capabilities amounts to compromising their effectiveness to 
the extent that this can lead the potential adversary to take the necessary measures to 
deny any possibility of a cyberattack. Cyber deterrence cannot, therefore, be absolutely 
effective, since the weapons on which it is based can quickly prove to be ineffective if 
countermeasures are deployed; 
• second, cyber weapons do not have the same deterrent effect as nuclear weapons, the 
latter having the unique capacity to inflict absolutely unacceptable damage, out of 
proportion with the benefit of aggression. It is a weapon of another nature, without 
continuity with conventional and cyber means. The equation is therefore necessarily 
different for the threat of the use of a cyberweapon; 
• nuclear deterrence is based, finally, on a dissuasive dialogue between the endowed 
states. Today it remains an essential component of international security and stability, 
particularly in the Euro-Atlantic area. The situation is different with cyberweapons insofar 
as they can be produced and specially used – for the less sophisticated of them – quite 
easily by a large number of actors, state or not. Consequently, cyberweapons are not able 
to create strategic balances that provide stability in the Euro-Atlantic area. 
The vocation of deterrence in cyberspace used by our British and American partners actually 
designates a concept different from ours: it is, by a combination of defensive measures, resilience 
and response (not necessarily cyber) to "dissuade" (in the American sense) an adversary. It is the 
reproduction in the cyber domain of a strategic debate which has lasted for 60 years and which has 
notably already opposed us on the concepts of “conventional deterrence” or “deterrence by denial”. 
On the other hand, it is possible, notably at NATO, to manage these old doctrinal differences. The 
Cyber Defence Pledge, the recognition of cyberspace as a field of operations, the policy of protecting 
the cyberinfrastructures of the Alliance constitute messages which aim to discourage the adversary 
and contribute, as such, to reinforce the global posture of deterrence and defence of the Alliance. A 
form of discouragement of the inclination to assault NATO members in cyberspace is therefore 
possible and acceptable. 
1.6 Different models of cyber defence organisation around the world 
1.6.1 In the cyber domain, the powers are few and well-identified 
A dozen particularly powerful players in the area of cyber defence dominate the international scene: 
the community known as the “Five Eyes”, which brings together the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, a name that comes from the alliance which brings 
together the technical intelligence services of these countries since the Second World War, Russia, 
China, Israel, Germany and France. 
  
Page 39 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Committed since the early 2000s, the French effort in the area of cyber defence is part of a dynamic 
of capacity development and strategic thinking that can be found in Anglo-American countries (the 
United States and the United Kingdom), in Germany, as in Russia, China and Israel. 
The cyber defence strategies of these countries are however based on distinct models (with on the 
one hand a model grouping within the intelligence agencies the defensive and offensive aspects 
and, on the other hand, a model separating these two aspects distinctly), as well only on opposite 
visions of cyberspace (the Russian and Chinese visions appearing to be fundamentally different 
from the Western vision). 
Furthermore, if the capacity effort is shared, the human and financial resources mobilised by these 
different countries fall within heterogeneous orders of magnitude. In addition, some countries have 
adopted or are going to adopt protectionism policies, in particular to fully control the security of their 
networks. 
Cyber, a strategic priority shared by the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany. Russia. 
China and Israel 
Undisputed leader in the field of cyber defence, the United States became aware a step ahead of 
other world powers, from the end of the 1990s, of the risks weighing on their information and 
communication systems and their infrastructures. A presidential Decree on the protection of critical 
infrastructure was signed in 1998, and the Department of Homeland Security was created in 2001 
to protect state networks. Legacy of long-standing attention to technical intelligence, the United 
States has given strategic priority to cyber defence. President OBAMA had made it a priority in his 
mandate and had appointed, from 2009, to the White House an adviser especially responsible for 
the subject. Cyber defence has gradually figured prominently in the US national defence and 
security strategy. appearing among the major axes of the National Security Strategy of 2010, its 
importance was reaffirmed by that of 2015 and confirmed again in that of 2017. The American cyber 
defence model differs from the French model, based on the separation of offensive capabilities and 
defensive. American cyber defence capabilities are, in fact, largely concentrated within the 
intelligence community. This model, although having the advantage of allowing the pooling of 
national technical skills within the centre of expertise that constitutes the NSA, nevertheless has 
drawbacks. It poses the problem of the acceptability by the private sector of State interventions in 
the area of information systems security, in a context marked by the revelations of Edward 
SNOWDEN, which highlighted the extent technical information allegedly collected by the NSA. 
The British model is close to the American model. The United Kingdom adopted a national 
information security strategy in 2003; this first strategy emphasised the partnership between the 
public and private sectors within the National Infrastructure Security Coordination Centre, in 
particular to ensure the security of networks and computerised industrial control systems. The 
United Kingdom presented its new National Cyber Security Strategy in November 2016. It 
constitutes the new framework for action by the British government for the period 2016-2021. The 
objective is that the United Kingdom can, by 2021, be in a position to be "secure and resilient in the 
face of cyber threats in order to be prosperous and confident in the digital world". 
  
Page 40 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
It was in 2011 that the German federal government adopted its first national cybersecurity strategy. 
Its version updated in 2016 reflects a vision of cyberspace very close to that of France. Paris and 
Berlin share common strategic guidelines on many technical subjects, such as cryptography or the 
certification of security products, but also political ones, such as the promotion of a resolute and 
dynamic European Union in terms of digital security. This proximity makes Germany a privileged 
partner of France within the various international fora dealing with these subjects, and gives the 
Franco-German couple a major impetus role in European projects relating to the security of 
information systems. 
It was in 2006 that the Chinese government's National Development Plan for Science and 
Technology mentioned for the first time the security challenges of critical information systems. Cyber 
defence was elevated to the top priority in 2014, with the creation of the Restricted Steering Group 
for Central Network Security and Computerisation, a strategic body bringing together the country's 
top political decision-makers. President Xi Jinping then chose to personally preside over this small 
leading group, sending a strong signal to the country but also to the entire international community. 
Cybersecurity is given a prominent place in the Chinese White Paper, adopted in May 2015. It 
constitutes the first public recognition of the existence of cyber-offensive capabilities and introduces 
an active defence doctrine, ensuring a potentially militarised response, cyber or not, to any action 
deemed contrary to the interests of Beijing. In December 2016, as an extension of this White Paper, 
China published for the first time a national cybersecurity strategy, which calls for seeking "peace, 
security, openness, cooperation, and order in cyberspace "And affirms its ambition to become a 
cyber superpower". Cyberspace is considered by the Chinese authorities to be both a place and a 
means of economic development and control of opinion. The Chinese approach to cyberspace is 
clearly distinguished from the Western approach in that it confers to the State a mission of 
"information security", which extends far beyond the "security of information systems". This vision, 
which China shares with Russia, is inherited from the strong attachment of the regimes of these 
countries to state control of information: the State must not only ensure the integrity of its networks 
but also control the content of information which pass there. This approach is in fundamental 
opposition to the Western conception of cyberspace. 
  
Page 41 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
As soon as he came to power, Vladimir Putin showed his interest in cyberspace. In 2000, he 
endowed Russia with its first information security doctrine, which describes information security as 
an essential component of state security. Russian doctrine expanded in the 2010s with the 
publication of the military doctrine of the Russian Federation in 2010, and the conceptual views on 
the activities of the Armed Forces in the information space of 2012. Russia stands out markedly of 
most of the major Western powers in his conception of cyberspace. Marked by a concern for 
information control inherited from the Soviet period, the Russian vision is not limited to information 
systems but extends to the entire information sphere. In contrast to the cyber doctrines of Western 
states, centred on the protection of containers, Russian doctrine, like Chinese doctrine, is primarily 
concerned with content. This perception is embodied in the concept of information defence, which 
is a pillar of Russian doctrine. Moscow thus places influence activities, in particular in their 
psychological dimension, at the heart of its cyber-strategy. The media are fully integrated as counter-
propaganda forces, and numerous trolling agencies pay Internet users to massively relay pro-
Russian messages on social networks. The organisation of the Russian cyber defence rests on 
capabilities in this field largely concentrated within the intelligence community. 
Finally, Israel is today at the forefront of cyber defence, thanks to an efficient government apparatus 
in close collaboration with the army, academia and industry. The Israeli strategy has not yet been 
the subject of an official document. 
Asymmetric capacity efforts 
The analysis of these organisations reveals a heterogeneous capacity development, in human and 
financial terms, of the countries which can be considered as the main cyber powers. 
The budget of the United States in the field of cyber defence amounted to 14 billion dollars in 2016 
and, in its draft budget for the fiscal year 2017, the Obama administration had requested funding of 
nearly 19 billion of dollars. In 2016, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) had 691 agents in 
the cybersecurity sector and made US$ 818 million in investments in this area, or 2% of its total 
budget. For its part, the US-CERT has a budget of US$ 98 million for 203 agents. Finally, if the 
budget allocated to the NSA is classified information, it is estimated to be close to US$ 10 billion, 
and its workforce exceeds 30,000 agents. 
The UK's new National Cyber Security Strategy, presented in November 2016, forecasts budget 
investment of £1.9 billion over the next five years. 
The resources and budget of the German interior ministry allocated to cybersecurity are not known 
with precision, The BSI employs more than 700 agents, to which should be added 100 new recruits 
by the end of 2018. 
  
Page 42 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Chinese cyber-offensive capabilities, the exact perimeter of which remains difficult to assess, are 
mainly concentrated within the People's Liberation Army, which is the spearhead of political and 
economic espionage actions targeting abroad. The latter is currently undergoing a major reform, 
one of the objectives of which is the pooling of attack and defence resources within the army. 
1.6.2 Powers of a modest size capable of deploying advanced offensive capabilities 
Having these few countries positioned themselves early enough on the subject, it would be very 
surprising if other countries had not already invested heavily in offensive capabilities. Indeed, 
the disclosure of American tools and the hacking tools available on more or less official markets 
can allow States, even of small size, to build offensive capabilities as long as they have a 
workforce. competent. Also, countries like North Korea, Pakistan and Iran or even Japan, South 
Korea and India, like many European countries, already have capabilities, even if it is difficult 
to assess. 
  
Page 43 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2 Part 2. The State, responsible for the nation's cyber defence 
The power of a state in the cyber domain is not measured only by the possession of offensive and 
defensive capabilities. It is fundamentally based on the ability and willingness of the latter to use 
them fully. It depends on the determination to discourage attacks by increasing the difficulty, cost 
and risk for an attacker. Finally, it presupposes that the State can rely on an industry capable of 
relaying or expanding its action. It is now up to France to take up this challenge of cyber-power. 
France's cyber defence is based on a model of organisation and governance which separates 
offensive missions and capabilities from defensive missions and capabilities (2.1.). Founded on the 
establishment of an independent defensive chain, this model guarantees respect for individual 
freedoms. Today, however, it does not sufficiently take into account the contribution of certain actors 
to the cyber defence of our country and does not fully reflect the missions of cyber defence. As such, 
it deserves to evolve (2.2.). 
The consolidation of our cyber defence model will allow us to better respond to, or even prevent, 
computer attacks. It should be accompanied by improved protection against threats from our most 
critical information systems (2.3.). 
The new ambition carried by this strategic review also supposes the improvement of prevention and 
investigative powers, as well as the reinforcement of the effectiveness of the penal response to 
cybercrime (2.4.). 
Finally, at a time when States' cyber capabilities are evolving considerably, France must act as a 
benchmark player within the European Union on digital issues. It must deploy a strategy of influence 
promoting its model and participate actively in the definition of standards regulating cyberspace at 
European and international levels (2.5.). 
2.1 The French model of cyber defence 
2.1.1 The origins of the French cyber defence model 
France has become fully aware of the new strategic deal that constitutes cyber defence since the 
mid-2000s, and has reacted continuously to the extremely rapid developments that characterize this 
sector. Cyber defence is a major strategic issue for national security and the economic development 
of our country. Meeting the challenge of cyber defence means being able both to create the 
conditions for operational superiority and to contribute to economic development and to the national 
and international influence of French solutions in this area. 
The 2008 White Paper on Defence and National Security enabled France to take a decisive step in 
taking into account the cyber threat and in implementing the responses it requires. He announced 
the creation of a national agency to deal with computer attacks and protect state information systems 
and critical infrastructure. With the ANSSI, instituted by Decree 2009-834 of July 7, 2009, attached 
to the secretary-general of national defence, France then set up a model of cyber defence based 
on the separation of its offensive capabilities and its defensive capabilities. A year later, when an 
espionage attack on its economic and financial ministries was revealed, France developed its first 
cybersecurity strategy which it published in early 2011. 
  
Page 44 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In 2013, the new White Paper on Defence and National Security confirmed the threats and risks 
posed by the widespread expansion of cyberspace. It elevates cyber defence to the rank of strategic 
priority and affirms the principle of a national doctrine of response to computer attacks integrating 
two complementary components consisting of the implementation*: 
• of a robust and resilient posture for protecting state information systems, OIVs and 
strategic industries, coupled with an operational organisation for the defence of these 
systems, coordinated under the authority of the Prime Minister; 
• of a comprehensive and adjusted capacity for government response to attacks of various 
kinds and scope, calling first on all diplomatic, legal or police resources, without preventing 
the gradual use of resources the Ministry of the Armed Forces if national interests are 
threatened. 
The 2013 White Paper identified the possibility of a major computer attack against national 
information systems in a computer war scenario as a threat of primary importance for France and 
its European partners. It specifies that such an attack, in view of its conceivable consequences 
(paralysis of entire sections of the country's activity, triggering of technological or ecological 
disasters, numerous victims), could "constitute a real act of war". 
Drawing on the consequences of this observation, Law 2013-1168 of 18 December 2013 relating to 
military programming for the years 2014 to 2019 strengthens the IT security of OIVs. This military 
programming law provides in particular for more than a doubling of the workforce of 3,200 people 
participating in the cyber mission at the end of the financial year and provides for a tripling of the 
credits devoted to this mission, with almost 440 million euros committed for the development and 
acquisition of new cybersecurity solutions over the 2014-2019 period. 
Several events have come in recent years to accelerate and strengthen in our country the 
awareness of the magnitude of the cyber threat. This was the case of the January 2015 attacks 
which were followed by disfigurements of local government websites which, if they were of no great 
consequence, highlighted the cyber aspect of the terrorist threat. This was also the case with the 
computer attack on TV5 Monde, a few months later, which revealed the vulnerability of a television 
channel participating in France's international influence. Finally, the attack on the e-mail of the 
members of the team of the political movement "En Marche" in April 2017, followed by the 
publication of the "MacronLeaks" a few hours before the end of the campaign period, was an attempt 
to the destabilisation of the French electoral process. 
  
 
 
* National Defence and Security White Paper, 2013, pages 106-107. 
Page 45 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2.1.2 The principles of the French cyber defence model 
Our country's cyber defence is based on an organisational and governance model that separates 
offensive missions and capabilities from defensive missions and capabilities – a distinction that was 
initially empirical and then enshrined in the 2008 and 2013 white papers on defence and national 
security. This French model is clearly distinguished from the model chosen by the Anglo-Saxon 
countries, whose cyber defence capabilities are concentrated within the intelligence community*. 
The French model has undeniable advantages. By distinguishing the missions and resources 
dedicated to cyber protection from those whose objective is intelligence and offensive actions, it 
facilitates the acceptance of State interventions in the area of information systems security, both in 
administration than in the economic sphere. It is considered to respect individual freedoms and the 
protection of privacy and allows the development of relationships of trust between private actors and 
the state services responsible for cyber protection. It is the strict separation of the areas of 
intervention, and its status as an inter-ministerial agency, which allow the ANSSI to be mobilised 
with efficiency and responsiveness, outside its traditional field of action, to deal with several recent 
crises, even if these attacks have, at the same time, highlighted the need to strengthen coordination 
mechanisms. This was the case, in 2015, for the benefit of TV5 Monde, victim of the first computer 
attack for the purpose of sabotage perpetrated in France and, in 2017, for the benefit of Saint-
Gobain society or to contribute to the security of electoral campaigns. For these reasons, other 
countries, such as Germany, have adopted a model almost similar to the French model. 
However, if it is not compensated by a very strong coordination between its defensive and offensive 
poles, the French model can present, in terms of efficiency, the disadvantage of a bipolarity too 
strongly assumed. Notwithstanding the advantages it presents, our model still lacks confirmation of 
its basic principles, a precise description of its governance, a clarification of its operational 
organisation, as well as a better consideration of objectives related to intelligence missions and legal 
actions. Finally, to be more effective and consistent, it requires greater fluidity of exchanges within 
the cyber defence community. 
  
 
 
* This is particularly the case in intelligence agencies such as the NSA in the United States and the 
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in the United Kingdom (see above). 
Page 46 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2.1.3 The legal framework of French cyber defence 
The legal framework on which the French model of cyber defence is based is essentially polarised 
on the description and supervision of the defensive component of cyber defence since the creation 
of the ANSSI in 2009 by Decree 2009-834 of July 7, 2009, taken in the continuity of the 
recommendations of the 2008 White Paper on Defence and National Security. Law 2013-1168 of 
December 18, 2013, relating to military programming for the years 2014 to 2019 (LPM 2014-2019) 
and containing various provisions concerning the defence and national security made it possible to 
clarify the definition of this legal framework. 
Under Article 21 of the LPM 2014-2019, the Prime Minister defines the policy and coordinates 
government action in the area of security and defence of information systems (Article L. 2321-1 of 
the Defence Code). The Secretary-General of Defence and National Security, in accordance with 
Article R. 1132-3 of the same code which defines his attributions, proposes to the Prime Minister 
and implements the policy of the Government as it regards to the security of the information systems. 
To this end, it has the ANSSI, a department with national jurisdiction attached to it, and whose 
missions are described by its creation Decree (see above). 
Article 22 of the LPM 2014-2019 set up the appropriate apparatus to protect activities of vital 
importance for the normal functioning of the Nation, which the 2013 White Paper called for. 
According with Articles L. 1332-6-1 et seq. of the Defence Code, OIVs are now required to 
implement the security rules necessary for the protection of their information systems, to submit to 
checks intended to ensure compliance with these rules and to report incidents affecting the 
operation of their systems. 
This law also made it possible to define the framework for the State's response to computer attacks 
targeting information systems affecting the war or economic potential, security or the ability of the 
Nation to survive. Article L. 2321-2 of the Defence Code thus provides services acting under the 
authority of the Prime Minister with the necessary legal tools to enable them to defend vital 
infrastructure against computer attacks. 
At the inter-ministerial level, the defensive capabilities of the State are steered by the ANSSI. 
National authority for security and defence of information systems, attached to the SGDSN, it was 
created in particular to ensure the following missions: 
• as an inter-ministerial agency serving all administrations, it coordinates inter-ministerial 
work on the security of information systems; 
• it prescribes preventive security rules for administrations and OIVs, controls their 
application and, in the event of a major crisis, can impose reactive measures on them; 
  
Page 47 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• it coordinates government action in defence of information systems and can respond, by 
technical measures, to attacks targeting administrations and OIVs, if necessary, by 
neutralizing the effects of the attacks. 
The ANSSI can also provide technical support to the Ministry of the Interior and the judicial authority 
with a view to characterizing the attacks, in particular by helping to determine the operating 
procedures and identifying the perpetrators of cyberattacks. 
On the perimeter of the armies and in accordance with Article D. 3121-14-1 of the Defence Code, 
the commander of cyber defence (COMCYBER) is responsible for the defence of the information 
systems of the operational networks of the Ministry of the Armed Forces. The COMCYBER, in 
conjunction with the ANSSI, is at the heart of the detection of attacks that target its perimeter and 
contributes, by sharing its information, to a good understanding of the threat. 
Finally, the DGSE and the DGSI deal with cyber defence within the general framework of their 
missions, described respectively by Articles D. 1326-1 et seq. of the Defence Code and by Decree 
2014-445 of April 30, 2014, relating to missions and organisation of the DGSI. When a cyberattack 
threatens the fundamental interests of the Nation, exhaustively listed in Article L. 811-3 of the code 
of internal security, the specialised intelligence services, acting within the framework of their 
missions of counter-interference, counter-espionage and counter-terrorism, can request the 
implementation of an intelligence technique to supplement the information they have at the national 
or international level, due to the action of their agents or by their partners. Cyberattacks are indeed 
a means of action increasingly mobilised by enemies or hostile groups, for the purpose of 
destabilisation, economic and political damage or the compromise and manipulation of agents. The 
Intelligence Act thus recognizes the action which falls to the intelligence services in the field of 
cyberattacks. 
The implementation of intelligence techniques to anticipate, characterize and assign is done within 
the strict framework of the law of July 24, 2015, relating to intelligence, under the a priori and a 
posteriori control of the CNCTR. 
In addition, Article L. 2321-2 of the Defence Code offers services acting under the authority of the 
Prime Minister the essential legal tools to enable them to defend vital infrastructure against computer 
attacks without risking to enter the field of incriminations envisaged in Articles 323-1 to 323-3 of the 
Penal Code. It is implemented under the conditions set by the Prime Minister and is only triggered 
when a computer attack is likely to affect the war or economic potential, the security or the 
survivability of the Nation. 
As defined by the Prime Minister in the classified instruction of March 7, 2016, the conditions for 
implementing the apparatus provided for in Article L. 2321-2 of the Defence Code provide for 
coordination of the action of the various departments concerned under the responsibility of the 
ANSSI which defines, organizes and directs the technical operations necessary for the 
characterisation of a computer attack. It is up to the SGDSN to carry out, if necessary, the technical 
operations necessary to neutralize the effects of a computer attack, after a prior assessment of the 
potential consequences of the planned technical operations. 
  
Page 48 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
By derogation from these principles, when the computer attack exclusively targets operational 
capabilities of armies or defence chains of command, the competent authority is the operational 
command of the cyber defence of the general staff of the armies, in liaison with ANSSI. 
The drafting of this Article, which the Council of State considered that it did not encounter any 
constitutional obstacle*, offers the competent services the legal framework necessary to respond to 
major computer attacks. Although the law does not require it, the organisation scheme of the 
services in the implementation of the operations authorised by the law could, however, be 
reinforced, with a constant perimeter of responsibilities, by the adoption of a regulatory act higher 
than instruction. 
Consequently, to consolidate the apparatus for responding to computer attacks, it could be proposed 
to define by regulatory text, with a constant scope of responsibilities, the conditions for implementing 
the provisions of Article L. 2321-2 of the code of defence. This text could take the form of a published 
Decree approving the classified instruction of March 7, 2016, the provisions of which must remain 
covered by national defence secrecy. 
2.1.4 The six missions of French cyber defence 
Before detailing the evolutions necessary for the consolidation of the French model of cyber 
defence, this strategic review proposes a classification of the missions of cyber defence in six 
categories: 
• prevention; 
• anticipation; 
• protection; 
• detection; 
• allocation; 
• reaction (remediation, repression of offences and military actions) 
  
 
 
* Opinion 387788 of July 25, 2013 “the authorisation given by law to the State services, to respond to such a 
computer attack, to hold materials allowing intrusion into an information system, and deletion, modification 
or alteration of the data or its functioning in order to carry out the operations strictly necessary for the 
characterisation of the attack and the neutralisation of its effects did not come up against any constitutional 
obstacle ”. 
Page 49 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Prevention 
The level of awareness of digital risks remains very different from one user to another. While OIVs 
and, in the near future, operators of essential services are legally bound to respect a certain number 
of cybersecurity rules, a good number of actors and a fortiori individuals remain very vulnerable and 
often react only after having been victims of a cyberattack. Small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) like local authorities are struggling to free up resources for their cybersecurity. 
However, given the threats that cyberattacks represent for business and individuals, all players must 
be made aware at a high level. While budgetary and financial constraints are real for small 
structures, there are, however, good practices in computer hygiene and in designing systems that 
are inexpensive and easy to implement, with particular emphasis on the risks linked to the human 
factor*. 
This prevention and awareness-raising mission is inter-ministerial in nature. In accordance with the 
guidelines of the National Strategy for Digital Security adopted by the Prime Minister in 2015, it is 
based locally on the action of prefects and state services. The ANSSI territorial network, the regional 
delegates for economic intelligence and the departments of the Ministry of the Interior responsible 
for economic security, and the digital transition network also participate in this mission. Chambers 
of commerce and industry, chambers of trades and more broadly all professional networks are also 
called upon†. 
Anticipation 
In addition to awareness-raising actions for potential victims, attacks can be anticipated (prevented, 
mitigated or neutralised in their effects) through better knowledge of groups of attackers. ANSSI 
estimates that there are around sixty different operating methods currently used by groups of 
attackers likely to harm interests in the field of national security. These attack procedures (MOA) 
can be schematically classified into three categories: 
• Strategic MOA: operating mode used by attackers with very advanced capabilities 
(exploitation of non-public vulnerabilities, codes with a high level of stealth and 
persistence, sustained operational rhythm) and known to engage in large-scale critical 
infrastructure sabotage activities, destabilisation or espionage likely to jeopardize national 
sovereignty. 
  
 
 
* See third part of this strategic review. 
† National digital security strategy, 2015, p. 21-22. 
Page 50 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• Active MOA: operating mode used by attackers who do not fall into the first category but 
are known to have already reached French targets or suspected of currently targeting 
French interests (institutions, government departments, OIV). 
• Other MOAs: old MOAs belonging to the first two categories on which the ANSSI has little 
information, or new MOAs which have recently been the subject of reports by security 
solution publishers or intelligence services. 
The anticipation phase is conducted by ANSSI and all of the intelligence services under the 
guidance of C4 TECHOPS (see page 55). 
Protection 
The protection of information systems is the essential brick to resist computer attacks. Whether it is 
the State or the OIV, the protection apparatus must be reinforced and be able to greatly complicate 
the task of the attackers, while facilitating detection by the competent services. This effort, which 
must translate into the perimeter and intrinsic securing of systems, is the only option to obtain 
resilient and secure information systems in the medium term. 
If the strategy of strengthening the resilience of vital information systems, and more generally of all 
systems, led by ANSSI, is absolutely necessary, the beneficial effects of this strategy will only be 
obtained in the middle term. In the meantime, France must develop a more assertive strategy with 
regard to cyber threats*. 
Computer attacks targeting our country or our allies should be detected and attributed and, if 
necessary, neutralised their effects. 
Detection 
Detecting computer attacks is an essential task in the fight against cyber threats. The detection of 
an attack which can occur, as we saw in the first part, several years after the start of it, is linked to 
the observation of the effects of the attack or to the identification of technical elements related to the 
attacker's operating mode. These elements, which can come from private companies of foreign 
partners, intelligence services or the administration, are centralised at ANSSI. ANSSI must also 
ensure the proper coordination of different entities. In addition to this consolidation and coordination 
work, ANSSI is in charge of detecting attacks on the administration's systems. The COMCYBER, 
by delegation from ANSSI, ensures this detection on the perimeter of the armies. 
The deployment of encryption techniques in the civil sphere, including for individuals, greatly 
complicates the task of detection tools which, unless deciphering all of the flows observed, only 
easily access metadata. This generalisation of cryptography invites to develop new detection 
strategies by deploying sensors within systems. 
  
 
 
* Annex 10 (page 166) describes the measures included in the military planning bill and their consequences. 
Page 51 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Intelligence services play an important role in this detection apparatus. They are likely to obtain 
information demonstrating an intrusion. They can, acting within the framework of their missions of 
counter-interference, counter-espionage and counter-terrorism, request the implementation of an 
intelligence technique to supplement the detection information which they have at the national or 
international level, due to the action of their agents or by their partners. 
Attribution 
After detecting an attack, it is essential to be able to go back to the instigator in order to be able to 
launch legal proceedings against it or prepare an appropriate response. The attribution of the 
attacks, if it remains a political decision, is based first of all on the clues collected during the detection 
of the attack and the investigation that follows. This work carried out by a private company, the 
police and gendarmerie services or the ANSSI is often not sufficient to obtain factual elements. 
To complete the first technical elements, the specialised intelligence services may request, as in the 
context of their detection mission, the implementation of an intelligence technique to perfect the 
allocation. The Intelligence Act recognizes the action of intelligence services in relation to 
cyberattacks. 
The implementation of intelligence techniques for the purpose of attributing cyberattacks is done 
within the strict framework of the law of 24 July 2015 relating to intelligence, under the a priori and 
a posteriori control of the CNCTR. The necessary information obtained by this means, as by any 
other means, is brought, when necessary, to the knowledge of the ANSSI and the COMCYBER for 
the exercise of their missions. 
Reaction (remediation, repression of offences and military actions) 
Responding to an attack requires quickly putting the attacked system back into working condition 
while ensuring that the attacker cannot easily get back on the system. This work, also called 
remediation, is led by the system manager who can benefit from the advice of the ANSSI to ensure 
that the new system is healthy and will remain so. It is up to the system manager to assume the 
compromise between a rapid functional restoration of the system and the assurance of ultimately 
having a healthy and robust system. 
In addition, a computer attack can trigger a judicial investigation. While cybercrime is exploding and 
requires appropriate punishment, traditional crime is also increasingly based on IT resources. The 
encryption techniques and the precautions implemented by criminals require the establishment of 
new means for investigations. These cyber means, allowing the recovery of evidence on the 
equipment of a suspect, will multiply, in particular the remote collection of computer data. Other 
means, such as the pseudonym inquiry, will have to be extended. This development must obviously 
take place under conditions which make it possible to preserve the incontestable legal character of 
digital evidence and the means of obtaining it (see below 2.4.). 
  
Page 52 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Finally, the significant development on a global scale of digital presents a real opportunity for the 
use of cyber actions in support of military operations. Some countries are already massively using 
cyber means to carry out intelligence operations or support special operations. "Cyberweapon" is a 
tool that can be particularly selective and whose effects can be reversible. Used to guarantee 
superiority in cyberspace, cyber capabilities also allow armies to conduct their traditional operations 
more efficiently and less costly. France has already invested in this area and cyber capacity is now 
integrated into all military operations. 
2.2 Consolidating the organisation of cyber defence 
Organised around its two poles responsible, for one, active computer fight (AU) and, for the other, 
defensive computer fight (DU), our cyber defence model presents, as we have emphasised, 
undeniable advantages. However, as we have shown, it takes insufficiently into account the 
contribution of certain national players to cyber defence and currently does not fully reflect the 
different purposes of cyber defence that we have just described. This is why this strategic review 
proposes to clarify the organisation of cyber defence by formalizing it around four operational chains 
(2.2.1) and strengthening its governance and technical consistency mechanisms (2.2.2). It then 
recommends optimizing the capacity approach (2.2.3) and setting up an operational process for 
managing cyber crises (2.2.4). 
2.2.1 Create four operational chains to conduct cyber defence missions 
Without questioning the principles on which the French model is based, the cyber defence strategic 
review proposes an organisation of state action in the area of cyber defence according to four 
operational chains, each contributing to one or more of the six cyber defence missions previously 
exposed: “protection” chain, “military action” chain, “intelligence” chain and “judicial investigation” 
chain. Each operational chain aims to have, in appropriate ways, ad hoc management and control 
procedures, which preserve the distinction between the different cyber defence missions. 
  
Page 53 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The “Protection” operational chain 
Under the Prime Minister's responsibility, the “protection” chain covers the perimeter of the defensive 
computer fight and aims to ensure national security in the event of a cyberattack. Prevention, 
anticipation and protection missions are carried out there. 
In accordance with the laws and regulations governing cyber defence in France, the SGDSN runs 
this channel. Responsibility for the conduct of operations is entrusted to the Director-General of the 
ANSSI. In connection with the ANSSI, the COMCYBER is responsible for operations carried out on 
the perimeter of the Ministry of the Armed Forces. 
The "Military Action" operational chain 
Under the authority of the President of the Republic, head of the armed forces, the "military action" 
chain uses computerised combat and must allow the conduct of national defence operations. 
The “Intelligence” operational chain 
Under the authority of the government, the "intelligence" chain covers all of the actions undertaken 
for the purpose of intelligence and in particular with a view to attribution. 
Today, the intelligence laws of July 24 and November 30, 2015, regulate the faculties of collecting 
data for intelligence purposes for the intelligence services. The employment authorities are the 
directors of the departments concerned, under the authority of their supervisory minister. 
The CNRLT promotes, between departments, the sharing of information of cyber interest. It can 
occasionally rely on the inspection of intelligence services to ensure a role of advice and capacity 
control. 
The Prime Minister authorizes operations for intelligence purposes carried out on the national 
territory, after the opinion of the CNCTR, which are carried out in compliance with the Intelligence 
Act, in particular concerning the duration of data storage and legal purposes. 
The “Judicial Investigation” operational chain 
The chain “judicial investigation” covers the action of the police and gendarmerie and justice 
services. 
According to the investigation frameworks, the police and gendarmerie services work under the 
control of the judicial authority (public prosecutor, liberty and detention judge or investigating judge). 
Different services are responsible for providing investigative services, specialised or not, with 
modern investigative tools and techniques. For example, the DGSI is responsible for the 
implementation of operational data collection capabilities; the Inter-ministerial Technical Assistance 
Service (SIAT) implements infiltration techniques; the National Agency for Digital Judicial 
Investigation Techniques (ANTENJ) via the National Platform for Judicial Interceptions (PNIJ) 
provides a judicial interception service. 
  
Page 54 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2.2.2 Modernizing the governance of cyber defence 
The cyber steering committee 
The guidelines and directives in the field of cyber defence are taken by the National Defence and 
Security Council (CDSN). 
The Cyber Defence Management Committee (known as the Cyber Steering Committee) is 
responsible for monitoring the implementation of decisions taken in matters of development and 
general organisation of the field. In particular, it oversees the smooth development of the system's 
capacity in the technical field (investment in human and financial resources, technological 
coherence base) and good functional coordination between the four operational chains described 
above. 
The cyber steering committee has an organic role and does not intervene in the conduct of 
operations. 
Responsible for preparing and instructing decisions at the level of the President of the Republic, it 
is co-chaired by the Chief of the General Staff of the President of the Republic (CEMP), the National 
Coordinator for Intelligence and the Fight Against Terrorism (CNRLT) and the Director of the Prime 
Minister's Office. It brings together all the ministries and services involved in the field of cyber 
defence. 
The secretariat of the cyber steering committee is provided by the Secretary-General for Defence 
and National Security (SGDSN). 
The Cyber Defence Steering Committee 
The work of the Cyber Steering Committee is prepared by a steering committee, under the direction 
of the Prime Minister's office. 
The Cyber Crisis Coordination Centre (C4) 
If today the State is well organised to face a major crisis of cyber origin (with the inter-ministerial 
crisis cell – CIC), recent operational experience has shown that the organisation of crisis 
management of lesser scope was perfectible. For cyber crises that do not require the 
implementation of government plans, as well as in the event of the publication of major vulnerabilities 
likely to be exploited in the short term, it seems essential to set up a permanent interdepartmental 
mechanism for analysing the threat, preparation and coordination, bringing together all the ministries 
affected by the crisis. 
It is proposed that this mechanism take the form of a Cyber Crisis Coordination Centre (C4), called 
upon by the ministries involved in the cyber defence mission. Responsible for the supervision of 
cyber defence, this C4 will be structured in three distinct levels: a strategic C4 (C4 STRAT), a 
technical C4 (C4 TECH) and a permanent and technical restricted C4 (C4 TECHOPS). 
  
Page 55 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
? Strategic C4 (C4 STRAT) 
The C4 STRAT will bring together, monthly and as often as necessary, all the actors concerned 
beyond the technical sphere alone. Its mission will be to ensure the exchange of information and 
analyses relating to computer attacks and to facilitate the preparation of the State's response 
options, both on the technical, diplomatic and even judicial aspects, without prejudice to political and 
operational responsibilities supervisory bodies and ministries and the judicial authority. 
As such, the C4 STRAT will encourage, by comparing the expertise of its members, the preparation 
of response options brought by the ministries and actors concerned during crises in the cyber field 
which do not require the activation of the CIC. To this end, it will promote in particular the technical 
elements from C4 TECH and will ensure the consistency of technical measures with non-cyber 
actors in crisis management. 
? Technical C4 (C4 TECH) 
The Technical C4 is hosted at the ANSSI and chaired by the Director-General of the ANSSI or his 
representative. It oversees the use of resources relating to the resolution of smaller cyber crises. In 
particular, its missions are to: 
• structure the dialogue between the representatives of the various actors to establish a 
technical assessment of the current crisis; 
• ensuring the consistency of the technical decisions of the State services; 
• ensure the consistency of technical measures with non-cyber actors in crisis management. 
In the event of a major crisis, and whatever its field, the C4 TECH places itself in support of the CIC 
as soon as it is activated to provide the authorities with a state of the cyber situation and provide an 
advisory role. 
? The permanent and technical restricted C4 (C4 TECHOPS) 
The C4 TECHOPS is a permanent body, with a technical-operational vocation, allowing a shared 
analysis between the competent services, of the threat, the modes of action and threatening actors, 
as well as the anticipation of responses in the short and medium terms, whose work is covered by 
the secret of national defence. 
2.3 Improving the protection of sensitive activities 
Consolidating the national cyber defence model proposed by this strategic review would make it 
possible to react better, or even prevent computer attacks. It must go hand in hand with improving 
the protection of our most critical systems against threats. In this regard, five fields appear to be 
priorities: securing state information systems (2.3.1), protecting vital organisations (2.3.2), protecting 
essential activities (2.3.3), the protection of local authorities (2.3.4) and the protection of democratic 
life (2.3.5). 
  
Page 56 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2.3.1 Securing State information systems 
The security of state networks is one of the priorities of the French cyber defence strategy. Beyond 
the most sensitive networks, which must benefit from uncompromising security, all of the State's 
networks must be given special attention. This constitutes the historic mission of the ANSSI, which, 
since its creation in 2009, has provided IT security expertise for the benefit of all government 
departments and, as such, provides technical support to many sensitive IT projects. As the national 
authority for the security and defence of information systems, the agency also deploys attack 
detection apparatus for the benefit of ministries, develops computer security rules that apply to state 
services and performs security inspections of departmental information systems. 
If we take better account of cybersecurity issues by public actors, in particular by the authorities, 
this remains insufficient. The real level of security of State information systems remains uneven and 
often too low, which exposes them to computer attacks, including those not targeted or carried out 
by attackers with limited technical skills. Several areas for improvement can, however, help to 
overcome these weaknesses: perfecting cybersecurity governance, optimizing the use of the state's 
inter-ministerial network for cyber defence purposes, strengthening cybersecurity supervision State 
services and the adaptation of the State purchasing policy to IT security issues. 
Perfecting cybersecurity governance 
The attachment of the ANSSI to the Secretary-General of Defence and National Security, which 
places it closest to the Prime Minister, facilitates decision-making processes and enables it to fulfil 
its role as an inter-ministerial centre of expertise. However, the visibility of the ANSSI and its power 
of control over the digital initiatives of the State are not enough to enable it to ensure that security 
is taken into account. Its expertise is often called upon at too advanced stages of departmental IT 
projects, which then generates significant additional costs and makes it difficult to ultimately achieve 
a level of security adapted to the risks. This is why this strategic review recommends that the largest 
and most sensitive IT projects in the State be submitted, from their launching phase, to the ANSSI 
for opinion. Regarding projects of an operational nature from the Ministry of the Armed Forces, it is 
up to the COMCYBER to be contacted for advice and to request the ANSSI as much as necessary. 
This approach should be articulated with the existing apparatus for supervising IT projects by the 
DINSIC. 
Within the ministries, the governance of information systems security must be strengthened so that 
cybersecurity is better taken into account in state IT projects. First, the departmental Information 
Systems Directorates (DSI) are insufficiently trained and have little responsibility in this area. Their 
work processes rarely include an information systems security component, and cyber risk is 
therefore often poorly taken into account in many departmental digital projects. This is why the 
strategic review recommends making departmental CIOs responsible for taking cybersecurity into 
account in the IT projects they lead, and strengthening their training in information system security. 
  
Page 57 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
With regard to the security needs associated with business IT projects, we can see that the dialogue 
between the business departments and the departmental CIOs can be improved. If the responsibility 
for the security of the computer base common to the whole of a ministry – including for example 
office automation or electronic messaging – raised by the DSI of the ministry, it is on the other hand 
up to the business departments themselves to fix the needs in the security of digital tools and 
applications developed for the benefit of their business, sometimes without significant involvement 
from DSI. They alone have the knowledge necessary to qualify the impacts of a possible computer 
attack on the data and processes specific to their activity and can, therefore, assess the risk and 
their cybersecurity needs. For this, they must be able to rely on staff with business skills and trained 
in cybersecurity. This mission must be carried out by security referents, from business expertise 
centres and trained in digital security. The responsibility of directors of administration with regard to 
the security of business information systems thus appears essential, as well as the appointment and 
training of digital security referents within the business departments of the ministries. 
Optimizing the use of the Interdepartmental State Network (RIE) for cyber defence purposes 
The Interdepartmental State Network (RIE) is the unified electronic communications network 
connecting the state administrations. Its management and operational operations are entrusted to 
a service with national jurisdiction created in 2012 and placed within the Prime Minister's office. Its 
missions are to streamline inter-ministerial exchanges and optimize the costs linked to the State's 
IT infrastructures, but also to strengthen the security of the State's information system. The state's 
interdepartmental network is notably based on a unified Internet access platform that offers 
centralised security services. These security functions allow an effective reaction in the event of a 
computer attack, for example by implementing measures to block malicious traffic. 
This common Internet access platform is nevertheless insufficiently used by certain ministries, and 
moreover often used without its security functions, which reduces the State's cyber defence 
capabilities. Its widespread use to all departments would also allow ANSSI to significantly strengthen 
its computer attack detection service. Beyond the aspects relating to the security of the network 
itself, it is therefore advisable to optimize the use of the RIE to improve the capabilities of State 
cyber defence. This involves encouraging departments to join the Internet access platform of the 
RIE and to make full use of the services it offers. More generally, departments should be encouraged 
to resort almost systematically to the security services offered by RIE. 
  
Page 58 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Furthermore, the exploitation of the metadata of the inter-ministerial network of the State could be 
reinforced, the service with national competence responsible for managing this network not having 
the resources and skills necessary to ensure their collection and their exploitation for cybersecurity 
purposes. However, these data are likely to strengthen the national capacity for detecting attacks, 
in particular by making it possible to search after the fact for traces of compromise in the State's 
information system. Entrusting the ANSSI with the detection of attacks on this network would 
constitute an appropriate response to this situation, it is up to the ANSSI to inform the ministries of 
the discoveries of attacks for decision by the qualified authority SSI (AQSSI) and possible action. 
Strengthen the supervision of cybersecurity of State services 
Since its creation, the ANSSI has operated an inter-ministerial security supervision service, which 
relies in particular on probes for detecting computer attacks, positioned on the networks of the 
ministries and on the RIE. The current model, however, faces several limitations. 
First, several administrations are still not subject to security oversight, which effectively limits the 
national capacity to detect attacks. This situation is explained by an insufficient investment of the 
teams of certain ministries in the support which they must bring to the deployment of detection 
probes. It should nevertheless be noted that the gradual connection of the ministries to the RIE 
should make it possible to extend the national detection apparatus to actors currently not covered. 
In addition, this security supervision apparatus is not applicable to state services hosted by external 
providers, since these private companies do not fall within the competence of the ANSSI. The trend 
towards outsourcing business applications is therefore likely, as a matter of law, to question the 
national capacity for detecting computer attacks. This is why this strategic review recommends 
imposing complete coverage of IT services used by the State through a security supervision 
apparatus, including in cases where these services are outsourced. 
Adapt State purchasing policy to IT security issues 
The use of cybersecurity products and services labelled by the ANSSI constitutes an important lever 
for ensuring the security of State networks. However, its implementation faces several obstacles, 
including the incompatibility of departmental and interdepartmental purchasing frameworks with the 
acquisition of such solutions and the inadequacy of departmental budgets in this area. In addition, 
the acquisition of security solutions by the State is still fragmented and, therefore, sub-optimal from 
an economic point of view. 
  
Page 59 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Several approaches implemented punctually in recent years have demonstrated their ability to 
remove some of these obstacles, while generating beneficial effects for the industrial suppliers of 
the solutions concerned. Thus, the registration of certain solutions labelled by the ANSSI in the 
existing frameworks for the acquisition of IT solutions has greatly facilitated their implementation by 
the administrations, and the acquisition by the ANSSI, in 2015, of a license a comprehensive release 
for Prim'X’s labelled software solutions has also been successful, enabling the deployment of more 
than 600,000 robust encryption software licences within the administration. 
An inventory of the needs of administrations for secure solutions and the development of an inter-
ministerial framework for the acquisition of such solutions, including according to the logic of release 
licenses, with a double objective of optimizing public expenditure and facilitation of the deployment 
of these solutions, could be entrusted to the State purchasing department, with the support of the 
ANSSI. 
Beyond the acquisition of specialised security solutions, the more general procedures for purchasing 
IT solutions by the State should also be the subject of particular attention to security, in order to 
guarantee at least the respect of basic good IT security practices by any new digital tool acquired 
by the State. 
The principle of opinion of the ANSSI on the IT projects of the State is not enough to achieve this 
objective, insofar as a significant part of the public order in digital matter does not come from major 
IT projects, but from current acquisitions or other projects – such as, for example, the installation of 
a video surveillance system as part of a real estate project. This is why the strategic review 
recommends developing standard contractual clauses grouping together good security practices 
applicable in the acquisition of an IT solution and strongly encouraging departments to systematize 
the inclusion of these clauses in their public contracts comprising a digital component. 
2.3.2 Protection of operators of vital importance (OIV) 
Pillars of state resilience, critical infrastructure includes public and private entities that provide goods 
or services essential to the Nation or can present a serious danger to the population. Although the 
definition of critical infrastructure varies from country to country, it generally covers at least energy 
supply, electronic communications, transport systems, financial services, public health, water 
management and services. essential audiences. In 2006, France thus defined twelve “sectors of 
activity of vital importance” and identified more than 200 “operators of vital importance” (OIV), public 
and private. These constitute the hardcore of French critical infrastructures. The security system for 
activities of vital importance, inserted in the Defence Code, constitutes the legislative and regulatory 
framework allowing the association of OIVs with the national apparatus of protection against 
terrorism, sabotage and malicious acts. It formalizes the permanent dialogue between the State and 
these operators in order to ensure their security. 
  
Page 60 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Since its creation, ANSSI has gradually strengthened its role with OIVs. Until 2013, with the 
exception of the electronic communications sector, ANSSI's missions were limited to the 
dissemination of technical advice by the development of guides and recommendations or the 
performance of security audits, only to their request. Faced with a growing IT threat and an 
increasingly high risk of computer sabotage, the level of security of these actors remained 
insufficient, exposing them, and then the Nation, to a major cyber risk. France, therefore, chose in 
2013* to impose, by legislative means, IT security requirements on OIVs, thus becoming one of the 
first countries to legislate in the field of cybersecurity of critical infrastructures. The cyber provisions 
of the military programming law of 2013 have entrusted ANSSI with new missions in this area: they 
provide that these operators apply the computer security measures set by the ANSSI and notify it 
of security incidents affecting their systems. of information. These measures, which were the subject 
of consultations with operators, are today fixed by Decrees of the Prime Minister and are therefore 
of a binding nature. ANSSI supports OIVs on a technical level in the implementation of application 
texts. In parallel with this approach, the DGSI, through its territorial network, carries out essential 
work in the area of internal security and economic protection covering, in particular, OIVs. 
This new apparatus is a major step in strengthening the cybersecurity of critical infrastructures. It 
has already made it possible to identify the nation’s most sensitive information systems, sensitize 
OIV leaders to cyber risk and has led to significant investments in cybersecurity. However, the level 
of maturity remains uneven between the various business sectors, and many operators do not 
currently have sufficient resources and adequate organisation to effectively manage the security of 
their information systems. Certain basic IT security rules are sometimes not applied to critical 
systems, some of which are still flawed and exploitable by low-level attackers. In addition, the base 
of rules set by the current apparatus does not allow optimal consideration of the particularities of 
certain business systems. It is important, in parallel with the preparation of these new rules, to make 
a financial assessment of the measures already in place in order to assess their cost-effectiveness. 
It is therefore advisable to develop the model to adapt it more to the constraints of the sectors and 
to the evolution of the cyber threat, in five directions: the adaptation of IT security rules to the trades; 
strengthening cybersecurity for "supercritical" operators; the extension of the regulatory apparatus 
to handling incidents; taking into account the particularities of digital service companies; and the 
development of private cybersecurity technical assistance. 
  
 
 
* Articles L. 1332-6-1 to L. 1332-6-7 of the Defence Code. 
Page 61 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The implementation of the proposals made in this part of the strategic review will be subject to a 
detailed impact study, which will have to confirm their economic feasibility (cost for economic actors 
and for the State), technical, legal and conclude with the no-risk for companies' business processes. 
Adapt IT security rules to trades 
In order to be able to establish security rules adapted to the different trades, it was decided to include 
them in sectoral Decrees. However, the requirements set by these implementing texts are today 
very close from one sector to another. In fact, preliminary work carried out with operators revealed 
a very heterogeneous level of maturity in cybersecurity, including within the same sector. This 
observation led the ANSSI, in agreement with the ministries concerned and the OIVs, to adopt a 
two-step strategy: firstly impose on all operators a common foundation of elementary security rules 
and then, secondly, adapt them more precisely to the trades and, if necessary, strengthen their level 
of requirement. The Decrees published to date embody this first step, the objective of which is to 
make all operators cross the first threshold in terms of digital security. 
The application of this set of rules will protect the most critical information systems against the vast 
majority of cyberattacks, in particular against indiscriminate attack campaigns such as those carried 
out by ransomware in spring 2017. However, it does not allow to secure, according to state-of-the-
art, all of the business information systems, certain specificities of which cannot be taken into 
account by a body of generic rules. For example, it does not optimally cover the security of the 
information systems of digital infrastructure operators (Internet exchange points, DNS service 
providers, etc.), for which it is necessary to develop specific rules, allowing in particular to take into 
account their strong interconnection with public networks. This generic model is also not suitable for 
the particularities of industrial and embedded systems. 
In view of the impacts that an attack against such systems is likely to have on the Nation and the 
increasing level of sophistication of computer attacks targeting critical infrastructures, it is now 
necessary to initiate fine adaptation work rules for trades. Work aimed at adapting security rules 
applicable to VLVs to the specific business characteristics of each sector could thus be initiated, 
under the guidance of the ANSSI and in close collaboration with the public and private players 
concerned. 
Reinforce cybersecurity for “supercritical” operators 
Because of their role as service providers to other OIVs, the electronic communications and 
electrical power supply industries can be described as "supercritical". A computer attack against 
one of these actors is likely to have repercussions on activities of vital importance, and therefore 
potentially catastrophic effects on the resilience of the whole Nation. 
  
Page 62 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In addition, the potential rapprochement between terrorist groups and actors with strong technical 
capabilities that they would be ready to monetize suggests the possibility of acts of computer 
sabotage perpetrated for terrorist purposes. The transport sector, which would then be a privileged 
target, could in the future be described as "supercritical" and require reinforced security measures. 
Develop the private offer of technical assistance in cybersecurity 
If the ANSSI has an important role to play with OIVs, in particular in terms of technical support and 
support for handling serious incidents, it cannot alone ensure the implementation of this apparatus 
and must be able to rely on a large ecosystem of cybersecurity service providers that are both 
technically competent and trusted. The qualification by ANSSI of incident detection, security audit 
and incident response providers, provided for by the regulatory framework and being implemented, 
largely meets this need. 
However, this qualification appartus does not currently meet the need for operators to have labelled 
providers able to support them on a daily basis in taking cybersecurity into account in their IT 
projects. The absence of a clear definition of cybersecurity technical assistance missions constitutes 
a clear obstacle to the development of an ecosystem. A new standard relating to the cybersecurity 
technical assistance profession, and the extension of the ANSSI labelling to this field, could prove 
to be very useful. A reflection could also be conducted on the implementation of a financial incentive 
measure aimed at promoting the labelling by the ANSSI and taking security into account. 
2.3.3 Protection of essential activities 
Beyond the OIV, which constitute the pillars of the nation’s resilience, other actors provide essential 
services for the daily functioning of the economy and society. As such, they also fall into the category 
of critical infrastructure. 
Despite growing awareness, many of these remain very vulnerable to computer attacks that can 
permanently paralyze their activity. The recent worldwide waves of cyberattacks have shown the 
extreme fragility and the lack of preparation of entities essential to the daily life of the Nation. The 
spread in May 2017 of the WannaCry ransomware, for example, made many services of various 
kinds permanently unavailable around the world * . Despite the existence of recommendations, 
guides and awareness campaigns, the level of cybersecurity of these actors is progressing too 
slowly in relation to the threat. The lack of good IT security practices, often linked to a lack of human 
and financial resources allocated to cybersecurity, exposes them to computer attacks likely to 
strongly affect their activities. 
  
 
 
* WannaCry has affected production plants, including Renault plants in France, ATMs, hospitals, station 
billboards, etc. In the UK, more than 20% of regional health management organisations have been affected, 
which has led affected hospitals to postpone certain medical procedures. 
Page 63 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
It is, therefore, necessary to impose a minimum base of cybersecurity requirements on these 
sensitive actors for whom a cyberattack is likely to have major consequences on the daily life of the 
Nation. 
Transpose the "NIS Directive" 
Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of 6 July 2016, known as the "NIS Directive", which relates to measures 
intended to ensure a high common level of security of networks and information systems in the 
European Union, has, in particular, the purpose of strengthening the level of IT security of operators 
providing services essential to the functioning of the economy and society. The first comprehensive 
legislative initiative of the European Union in the field of cybersecurity, this directive is part of a 
European strategy aimed at strengthening cyber-resilience at European level. In particular, it seeks 
to increase national capabilities in the area of cyber defence and to increase coordination in the 
event of incidents affecting several Member States. 
The NIS Directive sets a minimum list of critical activities to be subject to these new obligations. It 
also protects a range of activities which, if they were affected by a cyberattack, could have major 
repercussions on the life of the nation. Such an apparatus would also generate a ripple effect on the 
digital ecosystem by reaching a critical mass of companies using secure solutions. The actors in 
charge of health, social benefits or even the preservation of the national digital heritage are intended, 
for example, to be included in the transposition of this directive, in particular to be able to respond 
to a systemic criminal attack which would aim to massively paralyze and which unfortunately will not 
fail to happen. 
Define a common foundation of proportional security rules 
If it would be disproportional to impose on these essential service providers rules as demanding as 
those which apply to OIVs, it is necessary that the State establishes a common foundation of 
proportional elementary security rules making it possible to protect these actors. Indeed, if the 
paralysis of one of these operators would have less impact than the shutdown of a critical 
infrastructure, a massive cyberattack affecting a significant number of these actors would be likely 
to have a serious impact on the life of the Nation. The application of basic IT security rules will 
protect these actors against the majority of threats, in particular against the waves of massive and 
indiscriminate attacks, such as ransomware, which spread in spring 2017. 
  
Page 64 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Promote progressive European harmonisation 
If the security of OIVs is a sovereign prerogative of the States, the security of companies essential 
for the economy and for society is part of the competences of the European Union. Article 114 of 
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union indeed provides that the European Union is 
empowered to adopt measures intended to establish or ensure the functioning of the internal market. 
The essential role played by information systems in support of this functioning justifies the 
implementation at European level of common cybersecurity systems. 
In addition, a large share of these players is made up of multinational companies which provide 
essential services to several Member States, and whose information networks and systems are 
deployed in several countries. This situation justifies the search at European level for the 
harmonisation of cybersecurity rules applying to these operators in the different Member States of 
the Union. 
This harmonisation must however be gradual and take into account the different levels of maturity 
of each country in this area. Strengthening the capabilities of each member state must therefore be 
a priority, and France must ensure that the harmonisation process is not carried out at the expense 
of the level of security requirements, so as not to weaken the security of French players. 
Strengthening the role of electronic communications operators 
Electronic communications operators who, through their networks, connect their customers' 
information systems to the global network, and see all the flows passing through their networks, 
have a key role to play in the cyber defence of essential operators to the economy and to society. 
Cyberattacks targeting their customers' systems can indeed be detected, blocked, analysed and 
processed at the level of the networks of electronic communications operators. In addition, these 
actors are able to identify and alert the owners of vulnerable information systems – for example, 
from technical data provided by the ANSSI, which can drastically limit the effects of a wave. 
computer attacks. Electronic communications operators must therefore be major partners of the 
State in the fight against cyber threats. 
In this perspective, the ANSSI has woven many partnership links with these operators to improve 
the level of cybersecurity of their networks, in particular through technical advice and audits. 
However, given the development of the cyber threat, a strengthening of State cooperation with 
electronic communications operators in order to strengthen the use of their networks for the 
purposes of detecting and blocking attacks, preventing incidents and alerting victims, possibly 
framed by a new legislative framework, would significantly improve cybersecurity for all 
stakeholders. 
  
Page 65 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2.3.4 Protection of local authorities 
Local authorities are self-governing. The State cannot decide on the governance of their information 
systems, let alone impose supervision by its services. Because of this autonomy, combined with the 
diversity of their sizes and their physiognomies, the communities organize and manage themselves 
in very different ways. Their level of maturity and sensitivity to digital security issues is therefore 
very variable, depending on economic, cultural and, a fortiori, digital contexts. 
However, they remain particularly vulnerable to cyber threats. 
Given the weight of local authorities in the public sphere, the number of their constituents, their 
responsibilities in the processing of personal and sensitive data or the pre-eminence of their 
economic role, as far as the regions are concerned, their cybersecurity calls for support, even 
indirect, from State services. The work carried out in the concerted development programme of the 
DcANT territorial administration should, therefore, continue to take into account cybersecurity 
challenges and suggest avenues to help them. 
Encourage the pooling of resources from local authorities 
Local authorities have already committed to pooling their resources. 
Whether they are Public Establishments for Inter-municipal Cooperation (EPCI), mixed unions or, 
more generally, all forms of inter-municipal co-operation, the structures which assume the function 
of DSI, for example for the benefit of each municipality of a department, have demonstrated the 
effectiveness of the approach. Where such entities exist, awareness and support actions are simpler 
to set up and better accepted by members. However, the entire territory is not covered by these 
dedicated structures and experience shows that skills are relatively scarce and poorly distributed. 
More recently, several elected officials have announced their intention to quickly set up and finance 
dedicated structures themselves which must ensure, in particular at the regional level, the functions 
of awareness-raising and training, and even supervision of systems, and incident response. Some 
even plan to play the role of certification centres. 
These initiatives will allow the pooling of skills in information systems security and will aim to support 
local authorities in the implementation of their digital projects, safely and in a relationship of trust. 
Such groups of skills could also serve as an observatory concerning the maturity of digital protection 
and awareness-raising, on the basis of precise and shared regional indicators. They can be 
immediately identified as the regional benchmark for digital security. 
  
Page 66 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
However, initiatives aimed at developing certification activities for security products or services 
within these regional coordination bodies should be discouraged, insofar as they would not be 
consistent with the approach to European harmonisation of certification advocated by France, and 
would in fact lead to a counterproductive fragmentation of this apparatus. 
With this last exception, State services must support this movement, in particular so that the security 
rules applied or promoted are those recommended by the ANSSI, instead of being shaped by the 
sole offer of service providers. 
It is therefore recommended to support the creation, by the local authorities themselves, of a 
coordination of cybersecurity resources. 
Foster communication in digital security with local authorities 
The information systems of local authorities are the targets of numerous and very diverse digital 
attacks. The response to these attacks, and more generally to security incidents, is very often made 
delicate by the absence, at least in the smallest communities, of contact points for their interlocutors 
in digital security, in particular the services of the State. In addition, even if these contact points can 
be clearly identified, it is rare for them to be able to communicate effectively with specialised 
structures, failing to master a common language. The escalation of the security incidents which 
affect the communities cannot thus, in the state, to operate in a fluid way. 
Furthermore, even if they are carried out by local players, awareness-raising actions carried out for 
the benefit of smaller communities, and in particular the majority of municipalities, lose much of their 
effectiveness in the absence of an internal relay able to master the challenges of cybersecurity. 
It is therefore recommended to encourage and help each local authority, in particular the smallest, 
to designate and train a "referent" in digital security, a privileged interlocutor for cybersecurity actors 
and relay of awareness and training actions. 
Foster the development of an adapted range of products and services 
All communities set up services for citizens which require them to turn to outsourced turnkey 
solutions, in particular cloud computing, without worrying about the level of security or the trust that 
can be placed in them. When digital security is taken into account, it is only rarely integrated from 
the start of digital transformation operations. In practice, particularly in the absence of ad hoc 
benchmarks, few local authorities have the capacity to draw up precise specifications themselves 
or to choose the specialised companies likely to meet very specific regulatory needs and 
requirements. specific. Training courses organised by local authorities for the benefit of their agents 
are generally provided by private operators, on the basis of existing modules intended for 
businesses. 
  
Page 67 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Experience shows that, even if the adequacy between the supply of products and services qualified 
by the ANSSI and the needs of local authorities has never been formally analysed, it seems to be 
improving. It is therefore recommended to improve the integration of needs and constraints specific 
to local authorities in the ANSSI standards and in its catalogues of qualified products and services, 
by carrying out an inventory of these needs and analysis of the associated industrial market. This 
approach must be accompanied by the establishment of appropriate dialogue bodies, for example 
with certain inter-municipal players, in order to encourage the communication of these needs to 
ANSSI over time. 
2.4 Strengthen the fight against cybercrime. 
As the opening remarks of the report "Protecting Internet users: report on cybercrime"* already made 
clear in 2014, there is no legal definition of cybercrime to date. The first recommendation of this 
report consisted in the formulation of a very encompassing definition of the term: "Cybercrime 
includes all criminal offences attempted or committed against or by means of an information and 
communication system, mainly the Internet”. The preamble to the 2001 Budapest Convention (see 
box below), while it does not define what cybercrime is, mentions three types of activities that the 
convention intends to cover: attacks on integrity, availability or confidentiality of an information 
system; the use of electronic networks and electronic information to commit criminal offences; data 
breaches. 
The text of the Budapest Convention provides an outline of an operational approach to what the 
fight against cybercrime represents. Thus, cyber defence measures are implemented and legal 
proceedings possibly triggered when an act undermines the availability, integrity or confidentiality of 
an information system and if it involves the defence or national security (act of war, espionage, 
sabotage), the life of populations (terrorism), the functioning of the economy (denial of service, 
massive compromises or wide dissemination of ransomware) or of society (obstacles to democratic 
life, massive theft of personal or health data). When, on the other hand, the act does not have one 
of the consequences mentioned above, or when the information system is only used as a vector 
(phishing, internet sales of illegal products, dissemination of illegal content on the Internet, etc.), it 
does not entail the implementation of cyber defence measures. 
  
 
 
* www.justice.gouv.fr/include_htm/pub/rap_cybercriminalite.pdf 
Page 68 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Conventional statistical tools do not make it easy to draw up a precise inventory of cybercrime, these 
crimes falling into different categories of ordinary crimes without explicit reference to the use of the 
computer techniques used. Complementary to the expected statistical results of the anti-
cyberbullying* platform set up in 2017, the work undertaken within the Ministry of the Interior by the 
Ministerial Statistical Security Service (SSMSI) must therefore continue to improve knowledge of 
cybercrime. It has nonetheless been established that, in a context of increased digitisation of society, 
the multiplication and increasing sophistication of the means available to cyber criminals 
(anonymisation networks such as the Tor network, attack tools available on the Internet, etc.) 
complicate access to digital evidence and create the conditions for an explosion in cybercrime. 
As highlighted in the report published in 2016 by EUROPOL†, there are five trends in cybercrime: 
• the development of ransomware, which today constitutes the main threat among malware; 
• the interest shown by certain criminal groups in contactless payment technologies; 
• the rise of denial of service attacks, in particular thanks to “botnets” of connected objects; 
• the use of cryptocurrencies, in particular Bitcoin, as the preferred means for financial 
exchanges between criminals; 
• the use of encryption technologies to protect communications between offenders or to 
store information. 
These developments constitute an important challenge for the investigation services and a major 
challenge for the judicial actors who have to face a protean litigation sometimes requiring a real 
specialisation. 
The analysis conducted as part of this strategic review has also highlighted a movement of 
convergence between cyber defence and the fight against cybercrime. Computer attacks likely to 
harm the fundamental interests of the Nation and, more particularly, the information systems of 
operators of vital importance (espionage, theft or modification of data, sabotage hindrance, etc.) 
constitute offences passible of punishment since the Godfrain Law of 1988.‡ 
  
 
 
* www.cybermalveillance.gouv.fr 
† https://www.eouropol.europa.eu/activities-services/main-reports/internet-organised-crime-threat-
assessment-iocta-2016. 
‡ Law 88-19 of January 5, 1988 relating to computer fraud. 
Page 69 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Budapest Convention 
The Budapest Convention on Cybercrime was drawn up under the aegis of the Council of 
Europe. Signed on November 23, 2001, in Budapest – hence its common name "Budapest 
Convention" – this convention is the first – and to date the only – international text dealing 
exclusively with the fight against cybercrime. 
By the end of 2017, the convention had been ratified by 56 states (four states have signed 
but not ratified), some of which are not members of the Council of Europe such as Australia, 
the United States, Israel, Japan, Morocco or Senegal. The only member of the Council of 
Europe who has not signed the convention is the Russian Federation. 
The objective of the convention is to promote the harmonisation of national laws targeting 
criminal offences committed via the Internet and other computer networks. The text deals 
with both computer offences (illegal access, illegal interceptions, attacks on the integrity of 
data or systems, network security) and offences relating to content (child pornography, 
copyright infringement). 
The agreement also contains a series of procedural powers, such as the search of 
computer networks (preservation of evidence, production order, etc.) and interception. The 
convention also aims to facilitate international cooperation between law enforcement 
agencies and the judiciaries of States parties. 
2.4.1 Finely assess the extent of cybercrime 
The fight against cybercrime is first and foremost based on the fairest possible perception of criminal 
acts committed in the digital space. Four sources now allow the judiciary to learn about cyber 
incidents and offences: 
• the citizen, whether a simple Internet user reporting acts of cybercrime* or a victim; 
• police and gendarmerie services carrying out proactive search operations with open 
sources; 
  
 
 
* The Internet user confronted with illegal content or behaviour on the Internet has the possibility of sending 
a report on the PHAROS platform of the Central Directorate of the Judicial Police. The latter receives nearly 
200,000 reports per year, mainly concerning scams and child pornography content, incitement to hatred or 
praising terrorism. 
Page 70 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• trusted partners, aggregators or information relays; 
• network operators and electronic communication service providers. 
The assessment of the extent of cybercrime is today affected by two factors. First of all, when it 
comes from an IT security solution publisher, whose economic viability is closely linked to the level 
of the threat, it is legitimate to question its objectivity. Then, the police and the gendarmerie are not 
able to identify the totality of the cybercrime facts because the infringements noted cover only a part 
of the cyber malevolence, some of them being not detected and all the victims not being made to 
know.* 
A better assessment of the extent of cybercrime should however become available in the national 
police. The PERCEV@L project of the national gendarmerie and THESEE of the national police. 
The PERCEV@L project initially provides for an online reporting process for card payment† related 
offences, followed by an extension to the online complaint process. The THESEE project concerns 
five modes of Internet scams (mailbox hacking, Romance Scam and classified ad fraud, webcam 
blackmail, fraud linked to fake sales sites and Ransomware). Its purpose is to allow the filing of 
complaints online, to improve the quality of procedures and to develop the ability to analyse 
phenomena. 
The government platform "cybermalveillance.gouv.fr" (see box), of which this child is not the main 
object, also plays a role of sensor of digital risks for the Ministry of the Interior and ANSSI in order 
to refine the global knowledge of cybercrime. 
The government platform "cybermalveillance.gouv.fr" 
The government platform "cybermelveillance.gouv.fr" now plays a role in raising 
awareness, prevention and support in terms of digital security for the French population. It 
supports individuals, companies and local authorities who think they are victims of an act 
of cyber-malfunctioning for the establishment of a precise diagnosis of their situation, the 
contact with specialists and competent organisations close to their home (1,123 service 
providers referenced by the end of 2017) and the provision of tools and publications 
providing a lot of practical advice. 
 
  
 
 
* In this regard, it is regularly observed a lack of reporting or filing of complaints by companies who fear that 
this approach will result in unnecessary publicity on their vulnerability and damage to their image. 
† Just over 4.5 million fraudulent bank card transactions in France in 2016 for a total amount of € 400 million 
according to the Observatory for the security of means of payment. 
Page 71 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
This national assistance apparatus, led by the Public Interest Group (GIP) Action Contre 
la Cybermalveillance (ACYMA) and supported by an inter-ministerial approach associating 
ANSSI, the Ministry of the Interior and the State Secretariat in charge of digital, is 
accessible since October 2017 for all regions of France. Between May and October 2017, 
the testing of the apparatus enabled more than 700 connections between cybersecurity 
providers and victims*. 
The platform also constitutes a lever helping to reference and federate more broadly all the 
tools and awareness campaigns relating to cyber vis-à-vis the general public under the 
same signage. 
The platform also constitutes for the Interior Ministry and ANSSI the opportunity to refine 
the knowledge of the threat targeting information systems, through an observatory of digital 
risks. 
2.4.2 Strengthen the effectiveness of the judicial response to improve the fight against 
cybercrime 
In a context of blurring the border between cyber defence and the fight against cybercrime, on the 
one hand, and the transposition of traditional crime to the digital world, on the other hand, 
strengthening the effectiveness of the criminal response is a priority. 
Beyond the necessary adaptation of techniques for collecting criminal evidence to this new context, 
it is the conditions for preserving digital data that must be rethought today. Data retention and access 
is indeed the first issue for judicial police services. 
Adapting criminal policy in the fight against cybercrime 
The democratisation of anonymisation and encryption techniques, the development of parallel 
markets on Darknets and technological developments make it more difficult to identify 
cybercriminals and oblige to rethink the way of conducting investigations, in particular in view of the 
principle of fair trial. 
Consideration may first be given to the relevance of investigating in a more systematic manner, 
including in the absence of a complaint, when the information gathered suggests the probable 
existence of criminal offences. 
Then, it seems useful to initiate an assessment of the ways and means likely to reduce the feeling 
of impunity which animates a certain number of cybercriminals. Arresting and convicting those of 
them who have an established reputation and targeting the most popular criminal platforms could 
thus constitute areas of effort. In this regard, the recent operations carried out against the sites 
selling narcotic products Alphabay †  and Hansa by EUROPOL and the American and Dutch 
authorities are an example to follow. 
  
 
 
* 83% of cyber malware incidents were declared as viruses, but 44% of them were in fact attacks by 
Ransomware. 
† Online drug and weapons supermarket in the Darkweb which, according to EUROPOL, has been brewing 
since 2014 for more than a billion dollars in criminal transactions. 
Page 72 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
France could also step up its international efforts by playing a key role in Joint Investigation Teams 
(JITs) at the EUROJUST level. The example of the JIT mobilised in the NotPetya case should be 
commended and reproduced. 
To achieve this adaptation of the penal policy in the fight against cybercrime, a strengthening of 
human resources (magistrates and specialised investigators) appears essential. Increased material 
resources are also necessary both at the level of specialised investigation services and at the level 
of digital proof processing units. Efforts should be made to install monitoring tools adapted to the 
various open sources, enhanced decryption capabilities and remote data collection tools. Beyond 
this material aspect, an appropriate legal framework is still sometimes lacking, such as for example 
in the area of storage of data collected in open source outside of a purely judicial framework. 
Improving the judicial response 
The judicial process must be fully used in the general mobilisation of State services in the face of 
cybercrime. As such, strengthening the resources currently deployed within the judicial chain 
appears necessary. 
The creation in 2014 of the section of the Paris public prosecutor's office specializing in cybercrime*, 
as well as the centralisation in 2016, at the level of the Tribunal de Grande Instance (TGI) of Paris, 
of the jurisdiction in matters of attacks on computerised data systems go in the meaning of better 
coordination of the judicial response to cybercrime. However, it appears necessary to reinforce the 
staff of the Public Prosecutor's Office and the TGI of Paris, as well as those of the TGI of Nanterre 
and Pontoise which will probably be impacted by the THESEE and PERCEV@L projects. 
Bringing together the players in the fight against cybercrime and those in cyber defence 
The adaptation of criminal policy to the challenges of cybercrime must go hand in hand with an effort 
in cyber training for the benefit of the prosecutors, judges and investigators involved. In particular, it 
seems essential to raise awareness, within the framework of their initial and continuous training, of 
magistrates and investigators of the needs of the cyber chain. Conversely, better information for the 
staff of this channel on the challenges of the fight against cybercriminals and on the interactions to 
be maintained with judicial actors is also necessary. 
  
 
 
* This section is armed by two magistrates and a specialised assistant. 
Page 73 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
More generally, it seems necessary to develop exchanges between judicial actors and specialists 
in the cyber field. A reflection could thus be launched on the counter-establishment of a legal 
framework authorizing the reciprocal sharing of certain information collected by the judicial 
authorities or the services specialised in cyber defence. 
The present strategic review thus recommends allowing a transfer of the technical elements 
recovered in the judicial investigations towards the ANSSI in a logic of capitalisation of technical 
data on the threats, and from the ANSSI towards the operational services to facilitate the technical 
acts of investigation and to understand the threat. 
Make territorial interventions more effective 
In the context of economic intelligence, coordination between the various government departments 
concerned is now carried out at the decentralised level under the aegis of the regional prefects. The 
Regional Economic and Territorial Intelligence Committees (CRIET) thus distribute risk awareness 
actions – including cyber risk awareness actions – carried out for the benefit of economic actors. 
Better planning of the interventions carried out in the areas of the fight against cybercrime and 
cybersecurity enabled the CRIETs to become more efficient. 
This point joining the already identified need to group skills to secure the systems of territorial actors, 
the strategic review recommends that the creation of regional cyber defence entities be studied. 
2.4.3 Develop an international network of collaboration between magistrates and 
investigators 
Cybercrime does not recognize the borders between States, it is not enough that France alone is 
well prepared to deal with it. Data useful for guiding investigations are in fact held by foreign actors. 
France must, therefore, endeavour to perfect, with its partners, the mechanisms for mutual legal 
assistance in the fight against cybercrime and to continue the exchange of experience and 
technology in this area. 
In this logic, it seems essential to encourage an effective and constructive dialogue, in particular 
with the big American operators of the Internet*, and to maintain an international network of police 
and judicial collaborations. 
The permanent contact group, which brings together investigators and the Chancellery with the 
major Internet players, provides a first response to this requirement by allowing a technical-
operational dialogue. In matters of police and judicial cooperation, bilateral contacts, in particular 
with the source countries of cybercrime, and exchanges with the competent services of the various 
States within European or international bodies (EUROPOL, EUROJUST, INTERPOL) exist and 
regularly demonstrate their interest. But, in addition to sharing information, the objective is also the 
definition of shared, if not common, approaches and solutions. This is the case, for example, of 
European work carried out in the area of availability and access to digital evidence. Access to digital 
evidence today represents a challenge which must be met thanks to better cooperation with the 
major internet operators but also with the national authorities concerned. The decisions taken in 
defining the location of the data will be decisive in this regard. 
  
 
 
* The dialogue does not exclude when necessary, considering legislative constraints - European or national. 
Page 74 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Contacts with net companies at the national level or in an international framework (European Union, 
G7, UN) must allow companies to better take into account our needs in terms of removal of illegal 
content and in particular the contents of apology of terrorism. Our sector partners must also be 
mobilised regarding the use of new technologies for terrorist financing. 
The resolutely technical and cross-border nature of cybercrime implies a mobilisation and a constant 
effort in order to give actors in the criminal chain all the means useful for the development of 
investigations, the identification and the arrest of perpetrators, even if outside the national territory. 
Cross-border access to digital evidence – very often held by foreign operators – is therefore an 
essential issue for the proper development of criminal investigations. This access must be improved 
in order to allow the obtaining in a few hours of technical data and in a few days of content data 
(against respectively several days and sometimes several but currently). 
Finally, France must continue to promote international cooperation in the fight against cybercrime 
by providing demonstrative and training support to the so-called Budapest Convention. In this 
perspective, this strategic review recommends modernizing the transposition of the Budapest 
Convention with regard to cooperation measures, in particular to make them possible when no 
judicial inquiry is opened in France. In particular, the transposition into French law of Articles 29 and 
30 of the convention, relating to digital data freezes, is not adequate; freezing requests do not fall 
within the legal framework (data freezing is not framed in French law), they cannot be the subject of 
requisitions as provided for by the French text. It also recommends identifying the provisions of the 
Budapest Convention that may be brought into international law, beyond the criminal policy 
objectives pursued by the convention. France is opposed to the negotiation of a new international 
legal instrument. 
  
Page 75 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2.5 France's international action in the cyber field 
At a time when the cyber capabilities of States vary considerably, France must position itself as a 
benchmark player, leader within the European Union. This strategy of influence must lead to 
promoting the French model and to actively participate in the definition of cyber standards at 
European and international level. This strategy must be carried out within the European Union, the 
Atlantic Alliance, the United Nations and in the various multilateral bodies attached to them, but also 
through privileged bilateral cooperation. This approach of influence supposes in return for agreeing 
to provide assistance to a close ally victim of a large-scale cyberattack. This support must in 
particular be able to be offered to our European partners without France taking the place of the 
prerogatives and responsibilities of the rescued states. Through its public positions, France can 
express its desire to contribute to the strategic stability of a cyberspace of peace and prosperity. 
This strategic review first recommends strengthening our dialogue and cooperation with our allies 
and partners to prevent cyber crises (2.5.1). It then presents several proposals aimed at better 
guaranteeing European security and strategic autonomy in the digital space (2.5.2). It proposes the 
adoption of a classification scheme for computer attacks and an action doctrine (2.5.3). Finally, it 
analyses the conditions for better regulation of cyberspace (2.5.4). 
2.5.1 Strengthen dialogue and cooperation with our allies and partners to prevent cyber 
crises 
Strengthening the protection, resilience and cooperation of all cyberspace actors directly contributes 
to strengthening our national security. France must today increase its international efforts and 
continue to develop its bilateral dialogues on these issues with a view to consolidating the stability 
of cyberspace and the resilience of all States in the face of cyber crises. 
France must establish bilateral strategic relations and develop the channels for a frank and open 
dialogue with the main players in cyberspace. These exchanges offer both the opportunity to monitor 
and organize work of common interest at the strategic level as well as to improve understanding of 
the organisation and strategy of these countries, to clarify French positions on major subjects. cyber 
and share information about possible incidents. 
These contacts, and more broadly, our bilateral strategic relationships in the cyber field, respond to 
imperative traits: 
• the frankness of the dialogue, including with regard to the threat emanating, if need be, 
from our interlocutor; 
• the establishment of dedicated exchange channels, which will in particular allow escalation 
control in the event of a crisis; 
  
Page 76 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
• mutual acceptance of limits not to be crossed bilaterally, such as, for example, prohibiting 
certain practices identified as harmful by the two interlocutors. 
France is already conducting, under the coordination of the Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs, 
a certain number of bilateral dialogues on cybersecurity issues (with the United States, China, India, 
Brazil and Japan in particular). These exchanges must obviously be continued and, if necessary, 
deepened. 
As regards our structural, technical and operational cooperation, they are strategic instruments 
which contribute directly and indirectly to consolidate our national security and our influence. These 
cooperations are an asset for several reasons. First of all, they raise the general level of cyberspace 
security and strengthen its stability by improving the capabilities and resilience of allied and partner 
countries, as well as the international organisations to which we belong. They also contribute to 
improving our capacity to face a cyber crisis of international dimension, which would affect France 
or one of our partners. Finally, they are an effective vector to promote the French offer and expertise 
in cybersecurity, to publicise our national organisation and to keep us at state of the art by 
confronting our peers and learning from them. These cooperations thus participate in the 
dissemination of our political-diplomatic and legal vision concerning the responsible regulation and 
behaviour of actors in cyberspace. 
In the cyber domain, France's geographic priorities largely depend on the type of cooperation 
envisaged (operational, technical, structural, etc.) and on the institutional actor who will be called 
upon to implement it (ANSSI, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of the Armed Forces, Ministry of Europe 
and Foreign Affairs, etc.). Of course, our European and Western partners, with whom exchanges 
and cooperation are now deepened and regular, remain privileged partners. Certain areas are also 
priority such as sub-Saharan Africa, in particular the French-speaking countries, North Africa, as 
well as certain countries of the Middle East and South and East Asia. 
It is important that the cooperation maintained by the various government entities be coordinated 
and consistent with their respective areas of responsibility. In addition, the various actions carried 
out must be complementary in order to be able to offer some of our partners a French offer of global 
cooperation. 
In addition to the work carried out with our partners and state allies, France must contribute to 
strengthening the cybersecurity of the international organisations of which it is a member, in 
particular those which have to deal with information essential to our strategic autonomy, foremost 
among which the European Union and NATO. 
These cooperative actions, in particular when they are operational, require the mobilisation of scarce 
and limited public resources with regard to human, technical and financial needs. To overcome this 
obstacle, several avenues can now be explored, in particular the mobilisation of reservists, the 
solicitation of trusted non-state actors (operators, universities, private sector, etc.) and, finally, 
favouring the "training of trainers” action. 
  
Page 77 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The national school with a regional vocation on cyber challenges in Dakar 
France will support, in partnership with Senegal, the opening in Dakar, by the end of 2018, 
of a national school with a regional vocation (ENVR) on cyber issues. This project will be 
built in close collaboration with our Senegalese partner, as well as with the countries of the 
region, in order to define together the specific needs of West Africa in this area. It will be a 
school of a new kind. Its field of expertise could be very broad, ranging from governance 
and international regulation of digital technology, to more practical, even operational, 
aspects covering the needs of public and private decision-makers. The flexible organisation 
of its courses should make it possible to meet the training needs, both long and short, in a 
sector where knowledge evolves very quickly. Drawing on the experience of the Directorate 
of Security and Defence Cooperation (DCSD) of the Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs 
in the creation of regional schools whose teaching quality is recognised, this school must 
finally be able to deliver a certified education which will lead to combining, in the initial 
round table, royal, university or even private partners. 
2.5.2 Guaranteeing European security and strategic autonomy in the digital space 
Within the European Union, France seeks to promote the best balance between European strategic 
autonomy for digital security and the maintenance of its sovereign prerogatives in this area, in a 
logic of subsidiarity and respect for the powers of States in matters of national security. 
The objective of European strategic autonomy is the pledge of our collective capacity for initiative 
and action. As the cohesion of the European Union is weakened and questions have been raised 
about the credibility of the alliances, awareness of shared security interests is growing, as is the 
ambition to have more autonomous means of action. 
This objective fully applies to the security challenges within digital Europe and is declined between 
axes. 
The first axis is technological and will be detailed in the third part of this strategic review. European 
Union industrial policy is an important vector for supporting cutting-edge research and development 
capabilities in order to encourage the deployment of trusted digital security technologies and 
services, the reliability of which must be able to be assessed. Integrating security into all digital 
components will also give European offers a competitive advantage. 
  
Page 78 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The second axis is regulatory. Through its external policy, the European Union must seek to 
maintain its capacity to define regulations which take into account the requirements of 
competitiveness and the digital potential but which remain protective of citizens, businesses and 
member states, in accordance with our common values (right to privacy and protection of personal 
data, protection of critical infrastructure). 
The third axis, finally, is capacity. The European Union has an essential role in promoting and 
supporting the development of cyber defence capabilities of public and private entities within the 
member states, drawing on European know-how. This need also concerns the European institutions 
themselves (Commission, Parliament, etc.) which have to protect themselves from possible attacks. 
In this context, France must continue to defend the reinforcement of cyber-resilience in the 
European area (implementation of the NIS directive, cooperation for the treatment of large-scale 
cyber crises, cybersecurity of institutions and agencies of the European Union, etc.) and to promote 
a European industrial policy in this area (public-private partnership for cybersecurity, new 
investments in digital technologies for the future, so-called "breakthrough", etc.). It is also essential 
to work to take better account of cyber defence within the common security and defence policy 
(projects of the European Defence Agency, joint training courses, procedures and means to 
integrate the fact cyber operations of the European Union, etc.). France must, finally, implement 
means of diplomatic response to cyber crises on a European scale. 
Beyond these different dimensions, it now seems necessary to strengthen operational cooperation 
between the 28 member states of the European Union. Indeed, if the Cyber Europe exercises, 
organised by ENISA (the European agency responsible for network and information security) since 
2010, have enabled member states to test their collaboration in the event of cyber crises, 
cooperation operational in the event of incidents remains embryonic. However, it has been gradually 
structured since the launch of the European network of Computer Security Incident Response 
Teams (CSIRTs) in 2017. 
Many Member States, which are experiencing difficulties in developing their own capabilities, want 
the European Union to play an increased role in support of States victims of cyberattacks. The 
European Commission, as well as ENISA and certain sectoral agencies which could be called upon 
to intervene in this field, are particularly receptive to these expectations. 
This context could lead to a strengthening of the obligations of the Member States in terms of 
information sharing and the establishment of a supranational operational capacity within the 
European Union. 
  
Page 79 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
These proposals must continue to be subject to particular vigilance, taking into account the 
associated sovereignty issues. France, at this stage and taking into account the principles of 
sovereignty and subsidiarity, considers that in this area operational exchanges must be made on 
the basis of voluntary cooperation and wishes to avoid the emergence of an autonomous, redundant 
and competent European capacity to intervene within member states in response to incidents. 
However, it promotes the deepening of voluntary cooperation between member states, in particular 
through the European network of CSIRTs. France must fully associate itself and provide support for 
all initiatives that could help meet this growing need for cooperation in the face of attacks on a 
European scale, while respecting the competence of States. 
This approach must be based on four principles: 
• maintaining a clear posture on the distribution of powers and the preservation of national 
sovereignty in operational matters 
• strengthening the cyber capabilities of States; 
• the development of operational cooperation within the European Union 
• the promotion of an adapted model of assistance to States in the event of an incident, 
which notably supports a trusted European private sector providing cybersecurity services 
that can be mobilised in the event of a crisis. 
A variation of this approach in operational actions is proposed in appendix 9. 
2.5.3 Define a doctrine of action 
This strategic review recommends the establishment of a policy of action. Response options to a 
cyberattack must be prepared in advance to allow the authorities to react in the tempo of the crisis. 
Questioning the relevance of adopting a doctrine of action, however, first requires strengthening our 
capacity to discriminate against incidents and attacks in the light of our national interests. 
Adopt a classification scheme for computer attacks 
Today, in fact, there is no classification scheme for incidents and attacks that can be used at the 
national level and even less in a manner recognised by all at the international level. 
However, to make a political decision, the authorities must be able to rely on a classification scheme 
for computer attacks which must in no way become the trigger for an automatic response. In order 
to be able to react appropriately to a cyber incident, any State must first analyse and characterize 
this event. The effects of computer attacks are complex, varied and cannot be the subject of an 
exhaustive inventory. To allow an appropriate and proportional response, it is necessary to rely on 
a rapid understanding of the attack, supplemented by conducting more in-depth analyses of the 
operating mode and the techniques used. 
  
Page 80 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The United States has made such a classification scheme public, but it is not directly 
transferable. 
 
National classification scheme for computer attacks 
This classification scheme, compatible with the American scheme, integrates national legal 
standards (Penal Code, Defence Code, etc.) and international standards (general data protection 
regulations, United Nations Charter, international humanitarian law, etc.). It has four advantages: it 
makes it possible to share a common and synthetic vision, to accelerate the understanding of the 
situation generated by the computer attack, to facilitate decision-making with regard to the potential 
responses to be brought to it and, beyond of its use at the national level, to promote international 
collaboration in the event of an incident. 
It is essentially based on the effects induced by the incident. Among the elements that must be taken 
into account, we can notably mention the observed negative effects, direct and indirect, produced 
by the attack, the foreseeable harmful effects of an unfinished attack, a threat or an imminent attack, 
and the urgency to respond, and, finally, the technical aspects, in particular the innovative nature of 
the attack vectors. 
  
Page 81 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In order to characterize more precisely the seriousness of any incident, at least five criteria 
complementary to the induced effects must be taken into account, namely a criterion of intentionality 
(the intention behind the attack), a criterion of dangerousness (the nature of the targets), an 
attribution criterion (the nature of the attacker), a massiveness or volumetric criterion (the 
relationship of the incident to other incidents) and a recurrence criterion (the repetition of an attack). 
Finally, the seriousness of the incident must be understood in terms of the attack on four realities: 
• the fundamental interests of the Nation, its sovereignty and its democracy (attack on 
Institutions and democracy, attack on the continuity of State action and government action, 
attack on the integrity of the national territory, attack on the security of the armed forces, 
attack on the capabilities of nuclear deterrence, attack on the secrecy of national defence, 
attack on the capacity to keep international engagements); 
• internal and civil security; 
• the population and the environment (damage to the health of the population, damage to 
daily life, damage to essential civil infrastructure, water, electricity distribution networks, 
etc., damage to the basic needs of the population, damage to public confidence in the 
capacity of public authorities, damage to the environment); 
• the economy. 
This plan will constitute both a decision-making aid tool for the authorities, a fundamental element 
of an action doctrine for France, and support promoting international cooperation. However, such a 
scheme will never, on its own, make it possible to settle the questions of evaluation and 
characterisation of a cyberattack, which precede an attribution ultimately falling under a political 
decision to be taken on a case-by-case basis. 
Define options for responding to cyber incidents 
France, like any state, has a wide range of possible responses, military or otherwise, to an incident 
or computer attack. These options, which are sometimes cumulative, can respond to different logics, 
legal bases and objectives. Some may be carried out in concertation with our partners, others will 
remain purely national. In all cases, they can only be taken on the basis of a fully sovereign decision, 
based on a national and independent assessment of the threat or attack to which it is intended to 
respond. 
These measures are of several orders depending on the severity of the event and its legal 
characterisation. France must, first of all, endeavour to have recourse to mechanisms for 
international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of disputes. France has a clear, specific and 
precise vision of the application of international law in cyberspace, presented in the box below. 
  
Page 82 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The application of international law in cyberspace 
As the UN group of government experts (GGE) was able to conclude in its report published 
in 2013, the principles and rules of international law apply to the behaviour of states in 
cyberspace. If cyberspace has its own specific features (anonymity, the role of private 
actors), international law nevertheless offers the necessary means to responsibly regulate 
the behaviour of States in this environment. In this respect, the lack of attribution should 
not constitute a definitive obstacle to the application of existing international law, all the 
more since the latter offers neutral means of action with regard to the latter. The principle 
of sovereignty applies to cyberspace. As such, France reaffirms that it exercises its 
sovereignty over information systems, people and cyber activities on its territory, within the 
limits of its obligations under international law. The scope of the measures that France 
could adopt to react to a computer attack of which it would be a victim depends on the 
severity of the attack. The more serious the cyberattack, the wider the scope of the 
measures. A major computer attack targeting France, in view of the serious damage it 
would cause, could constitute an "armed attack", within the meaning of Article 51 of the 
Charter of the United Nations, and thus justify the invocation of self-defence. The 
characterisation of a cyber-attack as “armed aggression”, within the meaning of Article 51 
of the Charter of the United Nations, will depend on a political decision on a case-by-case 
basis. This decision may take into account, in particular, the following parameters: 
- Armed aggression is a use of force defined as such because of its gravity and its effects. 
It is the use of armed force by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political 
independence of another State. 
- The victim State could thus qualify a computer attack as an armed attack, due to 
substantial loss of life or physical damage to property. In such a case, the State would be 
the victim of a computer attack causing damage and / or victims similar to those which 
would result from the use of conventional weapons. 
- A second hypothesis could be that of a computer attack targeting a State, which would 
seem to constitute the first stage of a more classic massive military intervention. 
- Furthermore, it cannot be excluded that a series of attacks, each of which taken in 
isolation would not amount to an armed attack, could be qualified as such, the accumulation 
of attacks reaching a threshold of severity sufficient to allow qualification of armed 
aggression. 
  
Page 83 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Below the threshold for armed aggression, which represents the most serious form of the 
use of force, and above that from which a cyber incident is considered to be an 
internationally wrongful act, a distinction must be made between different severity 
thresholds: 
- Certain attacks could thus not reach the threshold of the use of force prohibited in Article 
2, Paragraph 4 of the Charter of the United Nations. These attacks could nonetheless be 
contrary to the principle of non-intervention, as well as to other specific rules of international 
law and thus pave the way for the international responsibility of the State responsible for 
the attack to be committed and the possibility for the victim State to take peaceful 
countermeasures or other means of retaliation in response and, in certain cases, to seize 
the Security Council; 
- In the event of attacks reaching the threshold of the use of force within the meaning of 
Article 2, Paragraph 4 of the Charter, but not reaching the threshold of aggression within 
the meaning of Article 51 of the Charter, the victim State's response options must remain 
peaceful, in accordance with the theory of countermeasures. Depending on the gravity of 
the damage, the victim State is however justified in sanctioning the commissioning State 
all the more seriously. 
The adoption of countermeasures is lawful if the following conditions are met 
- The action of the victim State is conducted in response to an initial internationally wrongful 
act (including the use of force), and has the sole aim of its cessation; 
- The action of the victim State is necessary and proportional to this objective, and must 
remain peaceful (below the threshold of the use of force). 
The violation of an international obligation by another State, thereby creating an 
internationally wrongful act, could manifest itself: 
- by “action”: in cases where the State in which the infrastructure from which the attack 
originates is itself the sponsor. The sponsoring State thereby engages its international 
responsibility and is exposed to countermeasures. Likewise, a cyber-attack emanating 
from non-state actors may engage the international responsibility of a State if the State 
exercises some form of control over the perpetrators of the attack; 
- by “omission”: by virtue of the obligation of due diligence, which is a principle of customary 
international law, every State has “the obligation not to knowingly allow its territory to be 
used for the purposes of acts contrary to the rights of others States”. A State which has not 
fulfilled this obligation (means) could thus, in certain cases, engage its responsibility and 
be the object of countermeasures by the victim State, even if it is not the sponsor. To put 
this hypothesis into play, it is nevertheless necessary to notify the State beforehand that its 
infrastructure is used for malicious purposes (knowledge criterion) and to ensure that the 
State has not fulfilled its obligation (of means) to stop the attack. Such a situation could for 
example be characterised by the complete silence of a State seized of a request for 
assistance, or the refusal to cooperate with a view to solving the incident or putting an end 
to the attack. 
  
Page 84 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Given the specificities of the cyber vector (an attack can be prepared clandestinely and be 
implemented very quickly; the damage can be considerable on all levels, human, financial, 
organisational), France cannot exclude the use of exceptional circumstances, to self-
defence against an armed attack not yet started but about to be imminent and certain, 
provided that the potential impact of this attack is sufficiently serious. In the context of 
armed conflict, the planning and conduct of cyber operations that may be considered as 
“attacks” within the meaning of jus in Bello (or international humanitarian law) will be subject 
to it. The main principles of this right are necessity, proportionality, distinction and 
humanity. Beyond the main general principles, it is a matter of deciding the operational 
questions which arise on a case by case basis, on the basis of precise and proven facts. 
In this analysis, the following elements should in particular be taken into account: 
- Cyberweapons must be able to be used in a discriminatory manner: the designers of the 
cyberweapon must ensure that it can be aimed at one or more targets explicitly designated, 
while taking care to minimize the negative effects on others entities as the designated 
target. It is a condition for respecting the principles of proportionality and distinction; 
- The civilian population and civilian objects must not be attacked, unless civilians 
participate directly in hostilities, and civilian objects have lost their protection by becoming 
military objectives 
The neutrality of States not party to conflicts must be respected if the simple transit of a 
cyberattack through the infrastructures of a State not party to the armed conflict seems to 
be tolerable in international humanitarian law, on the other hand, the use of the 
infrastructures of this State as attack infrastructure is against international law. 
If the situation required, it would then be possible to take retaliatory measures, resort to exceptional 
self-protection mechanisms and / or adopt peaceful countermeasures. The most serious cases may 
require a response using force. The main options for responding to cyber incidents are presented 
in Appendix 8. 
2.5.4 Regulating cyberspace 
France must take the initiative to promote the strategic stability of cyberspace and its vision of the 
application of existing international law in this area (law applicable in peacetime and the rights of 
armed conflict). This approach should be complemented by the identification and promotion of new 
standards of responsible behaviour by states in cyberspace. It is therefore a question of agreeing 
on regulatory options or informal international standards, allowing us to preserve our values and our 
interests by discouraging the most destabilizing offensive IT actions. 
  
Page 85 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
France must defend its vision of a secure, free and open digital space within the various fora and 
international organisations in which it participates as well as with its state partners but also in new 
formats which remain to be defined, including, where appropriate, the private sector. 
We first present the rules and standards applicable to States and possible developments for the 
latter, before turning to the rules and standards relating to the responsibility of private actors in the 
security of cyberspace. 
Rules and standards applicable to States 
The various negotiation cycles conducted within the framework of the United Nations (UN) 
Governmental Group of Experts (GGE) on cybersecurity have made significant progress in terms of 
international regulation. 
France has also had the opportunity, with several of its partners, to affirm its position in favour of 
the clear and unequivocal recognition of the lawfulness of the means of responding to a cyberattack, 
which they involve the use of force (self-defence) or not (countermeasures, retaliatory measures, 
etc.), and the applicability of international humanitarian law to cyber operations carried out in the 
context of armed conflicts. 
The failure of the GGE's 2016-2017 negotiation cycle will not put an end to France's efforts to 
promote standards of behaviour and confidence-building measures at the international level in 
favour of the stability and security of cyberspace. 
If negotiations stalled on the question of the applicability of international law to cyberspace, France 
had nevertheless managed to generate a consensus of all experts on several of its proposed 
principles for regulating cyberspace. An agreement had notably been reached concerning the 
control of exports of offensive cyber tools and techniques or the prohibition made on non-state 
actors, including private companies, from carrying out offensive activities in cyberspace for 
themselves and on behalf other non-state actors. The proposal to follow up on the implementation 
of behaviour standards and confidence-building measures already approved had also aroused wide 
interest among representatives of the GGE. 
France will therefore continue to work towards the universalisation of certain standards applicable 
in cyberspace with a view to strengthening security. This approach revolves around three principles: 
prevention, cooperation, stability. 
? In order to strengthen resilience in and of the digital space: the principle of prevention 
The uncertainty intrinsically linked to the attribution of a cyberattack should encourage States to 
focus their efforts on preventive measures, making it possible to reduce their vulnerability. 
  
Page 86 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The defensive pillars on which the French cybersecurity model is based (a national regulatory 
framework for the protection of critical infrastructures; a high level of requirements in terms of 
systems and data security; an organic separation between intelligence and cybersecurity) deserve, 
in view of their stabilizing effect, to be disseminated internationally. States choosing to adopt this 
model would thus be led in particular to set up an institutional organisation making it possible to 
responsibly manage the vulnerabilities discovered. 
In addition, these states should commit to limiting the proliferation of cyberweapons by controlling 
the export of offensive cyber tools and techniques (while taking into account the legitimate interests 
of cybersecurity companies and the academic world) and by supervising the destabilizing practices 
of private actors (these States should not authorize, within their jurisdiction, the use by non-state 
actors, in particular of the private sector, of techniques and cyber tools which can have unfavourable 
consequences on a third party). 
? In order to implement and enforce the standards already approved: the principle of cooperation 
Improving the cooperation of the international community in cyberspace is an effective way to 
reinforce its stability through mutual knowledge, even trust, deepened between the actors and by 
the establishment of mechanisms for joint crisis management, communication and de-escalation. 
In this perspective, France must in particular work to reach an agreement, at the international level, 
on the obligations which weigh on a State whose infrastructures would be used for malicious 
purposes. The objective is to apply, in the cyber field, the principle of due diligence which provides 
that every State has the obligation "not to allow its territory to be used for the purposes of acts 
contrary to the rights of other States". This principle of "cyber-diligence" could in particular make it 
possible to strengthen voluntary operational cooperation between States, essential in order to 
protect certain critical infrastructures and to respond to major cyberattacks, especially when these 
transit via a third State. 
France will propose to its partners to study the feasibility of a cooperative mechanism for monitoring 
the implementation of the recommendations agreed during the GGE sessions of 2013 and 2015, or 
even in other frameworks such as the G7. This intergovernmental apparatus could notably be based 
on peer review practices, conducted on a voluntary basis, formulating recommendations addressed 
to States. A directory of identified contact points would also help establish communication channels 
that facilitate crisis prevention and resolution. 
? To ensure the right of states to defend themselves in a legal and appropriate manner: the principle of 
stability 
  
Page 87 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
On the basis of the recognition by the GGE in 2013 and in 2015 of the application of existing 
international law in cyberspace, France must continue to promote the principle of the existence of 
certain rights allowing States victims of cyberattacks to take action. appropriate measures to 
preserve international peace and security. 
The first of these rights would allow a victim state to seize the Security Council of the United Nations, 
in the event that the situation is serious enough to be considered a threat to peace and international 
security. Among other options, the Security Council could then adopt coercive measures on the 
basis of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. 
The second of these rights is to be able to respond to cyberattacks. If States must seek to settle 
their differences through cooperation and negotiation, this does not exclude the possibility for a 
State victim of a cyberattack having reached a critical infrastructure to take the necessary and 
proportional technical measures in order to neutralize the effects of this attack, in compliance with 
its obligations under international law. 
The third right is, finally, the possibility of considering a cyberattack as an armed attack, in particular 
if it was carried out against a critical infrastructure, resulting in paralysis or the destruction of vital 
economic functions and activities, or if it undermined the population. 
Rules and standards concerning the responsibility of private actors in cyberspace security 
The rise of digital technology as a new tool and space for confrontation has given the private sector, 
in particular to a certain number of systemic actors (.), a critical role and an unprecedented 
responsibility in the preservation of international peace and security. 
Cyberspace is largely made up of commercial products for the general public, which can serve as a 
support for large-scale attacks which exploit their manufacturing defects (Windows software flaw for 
WannaCry and Petya attacks). It is therefore necessary to set international standards aimed at 
ensuring that products of a systemic nature cannot be diverted from their initial use to conduct 
computer attacks. The problem is posed in an increasing way with the multiplication of connected 
objects that can serve as attack vectors. 
“Cyberweapons” (intrusive or destructive software) are also partly produced by private companies 
in a market which is very difficult to regulate due to the dual offensive and defensive purpose 
inherent in these products. Intrusion software is now included in the list of dual-use goods of the 
Wassenaar Arrangement, a multilateral regime for the control of conventional weapons and dual-
use goods and technologies that France applies. It is necessary to continue regulatory efforts in this 
direction, including by raising the question of the inclusion of certain cyber tools on the list of war 
materials. This aspect will be deepened in the third part of this strategic review, taking into account 
the viability of a national or European offer. 
  
Page 88 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Finally, "mercenary" services are developing and offering offensive cyber counterattack services, 
according to a logic of private self-defence (Hackback). In order to allow States to maintain the 
monopoly of legitimate violence in cyberspace, it is necessary to lay down clear rules for businesses 
with regard to "active" cyber defence. 
In this context, interstate regulation alone cannot provide an effective and lasting solution to the 
security challenges of the digital world. Strengthening the stability and international security of 
cyberspace therefore requires the definition of new forms of regulation, taking into account the role 
of the private sector. 
Three priority axes for a better regulation of the activities of the private sector need to be addressed: 
the supervision of offensive action by the private sector in cyberspace, the control of exports of cyber 
tools, software and techniques, and the responsibility of companies in the design and maintenance 
of digital products. 
? Supervise the offensive action of the private sector in cyberspace 
The proliferation of attacks and the difficulties encountered in prosecuting them have prompted the 
private sector to develop cyber defence capabilities. This dynamic can lead to promoting Hackback, 
that is to say the authorisation for a private actor to carry out cyber offensive actions in response to 
an attack of which he is the victim. 
At the same time, some States plan to entrust private companies with a certain number of cyber 
offensive actions as part of their military policy, like what exists with private military companies for 
traditional capabilities. 
The use of offensive capabilities by the private sector poses a risk of systemic instability in 
cyberspace. The conduct of such computer attacks against actors located on the territory of another 
State, or even directly against a State, would entail a risk of dangerous escalation and would call 
into question the monopoly of the international use of force by States. In addition, the question of 
attribution is posed in the same way for the private sector as for States. Indeed, these companies 
often having multiple international holdings, they could be brought to lead the response from the 
territory of a third country, different from that having undergone the aggression. This would 
complicate the attribution. 
Faced with the risk of a multiplication of offensive actions in cyberspace, France proposes, on the 
one hand, to promote the prevention of the use of cyber offensive capabilities by non-state actors 
and, on the other hand, to support the prohibition, for non-state actors, from carrying out offensive 
activities in cyberspace for themselves or on behalf of other non-state actors, except in very specific 
cases and provided that the technical actions possible in this context are strictly framed. 
In order to be realistic, such rules must be defined precisely on the technical level in order to draw 
a clear line, controllable and acceptable to all. The question of a possible exception to the general 
prohibition on the use of cyber offensive actions by private companies in self-defence will have to 
be asked at the international level. 
  
Page 89 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
? Corporate security responsibility for the design and maintenance of digital products 
Many computer attacks are made possible by the lack of security updates for widely used computer 
products. This situation raised the question of corporate responsibility for maintaining security 
conditions. This risk takes on a systemic dimension when the products concerned are used 
extensively. 
It therefore seems relevant to lay down at international level a principle of responsibility for the 
security of systemic private actors in the design, integration, deployment and maintenance of their 
digital products and services. This accountability could translate into an obligation for systemic 
companies to guarantee the long-term security of their digital products, in particular by providing 
appropriate patches in the event of vulnerability. The level of responsibility must be fixed according 
to the role and the size of the actor concerned and could be presented as an obligation of means 
rather than results. 
The primary responsibility rests with the producer, who must guarantee progressive security 
corresponding to the use of his product throughout its lifetime, in accordance with good IT security 
development practices. This aims both to guarantee a level of security for the product itself but also 
a minimum level of security vis-à-vis the systems to which this product is connected. The use of 
security certification, in particular within the framework of the European certification scheme being 
defined, should be strongly encouraged and even made compulsory for critical components in 
sensitive sectors. 
Given the rapid evolution of state of the art in digital security, it is the producer's responsibility to put 
in place the necessary apparatus to continuously maintain the security of his products (watch, 
dedicated teams security reviews, training of development teams, “bug bounty” competitions, etc.). 
The patches must also be accessible, as widely as possible, even in the absence of a maintenance 
contract, and within a reasonable time once the vulnerability is brought to the attention of the 
manufacturer. 
The producer's responsibility must extend beyond the end of the product's marketing date and for a 
period long enough to cover the life of the products concerned. In the event of permanent cessation 
of maintenance, it is necessary for the producer to make available the necessary technical 
information (code, documentation) so that its customers can take charge of maintaining the condition 
in security themselves. 
  
Page 90 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Producers must also be able to provide assistance to their customers in the event of an attack, in 
particular in order to facilitate the restoration of the functioning of the products concerned. This 
responsibility relates in particular to supporting public authorities in the event of a breach of a critical 
system. At a minimum, this would involve communicating the necessary expertise and technical 
information, as well as providing systems allowing the reconstruction and updating of the product. 
Furthermore, the responsibility of distributors and integrators should also be defined. The distribution 
of products in obsolete or non-updatable versions must be prohibited, as well as the distribution of 
products known for their insufficient level of security. Indeed, the integration or purchase by 
customers of such products represents a risk not only for their systems but also for the entire digital 
space. 
In this perspective, France must mobilize the private sector to disseminate good practices and codes 
of conduct as well as to contribute to taking these issues into account in contractual clauses. 
However, for the most sensitive products, regulatory initiatives, in particular at European level, could 
be envisaged. 
Negotiation formats 
The failure of negotiations in the UN GGE underlines the absence of a common vision, shared by 
the main cyber powers, as to the international security architecture which must govern relations 
between states in the digital age. However, this failure in no way signifies the end of diplomatic 
efforts to regulate this area. France must continue to take an active part in these debates, whatever 
the negotiation framework chosen: the UN, the G20, the G7 or even regional organisations such as 
the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
The failure of the last session of the GGE invites us to rethink the treatment of cybersecurity issues 
within the United Nations. 
The G7, of which France will assume the presidency in 2019, already published, in March 2017, the 
Lucca Declaration on the responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace. This text, first negotiated 
within the framework of the Ise-Shima Cyber Group, takes up the standards of behaviour agreed in 
2015 by the GGE, while reaffirming and deepening the recognition of the full applicability of 
international law to cyberspace. 
The G20 seems to constitute, for its part, a forum adapted to a subject combining issues of 
sovereignty, international regulation and private actors. In 2015, the G20 member states agreed to 
ban the use of cyber means for economic espionage. 
The work within the OSCE needs to be further developed. France is continuing its action in favour 
of the implementation of the 16 confidence-building measures applied to cyberspace, adopted in 
2013 and 2016. It will continue to encourage its partners to adopt inter-ministerial procedures which 
can be mobilised to ensure good communication between states in times of crisis. Such 
mechanisms could usefully be replicated in other regional fora (African Union, Organisation of 
American States, ASEAN regional forum, etc.). 
  
Page 91 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In addition to these intergovernmental formats, the so-called "track 2" forums, which bring together 
States and representatives of civil society, the private world or research such as the Global 
Commission for the Stability of Cyberspace, the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, Sino, European 
Cyber Dialogue, etc. These forums also constitute important frameworks for debate. 
This strategic review recommends the creation of a new national (or European) think tank dedicated 
to cyber defence issues, within which the ideas of France could find a relay. 
It also recommends the launch of a French initiative as part of the G20 to regulate the activities of 
the private sector having an impact on the international security of cyberspace, around three axes: 
• the supervision of offensive actions by the private sector in cyberspace 
• export control of certain cyber tools, software and techniques 
• the security responsibility of systemic companies for the design and maintenance of digital 
products. 
*** 
France's positions must make it possible to display its desire to build strategic stability in cyberspace, 
so that it is at peace, prosperous and respectful of freedoms and in which it intends to ensure all its 
sovereign functions and assert its sovereignty. 
The French model, based on the establishment of an independent defensive chain, must be 
promoted among our partners, in particular through the conduct of strategic dialogues dedicated 
specifically to cyber issues, and in various European and international forums. France must develop 
these bilateral dialogues as a priority with a few key countries, with the aim of negotiating 
frameworks for political agreement that will avoid the most destabilizing or dangerous actions 
(Russia, China, United States, United Kingdom, etc.). 
France must also be a driving force for Europe to become a space conducive to digital development 
and guaranteeing citizens a cyberspace of trust, secure and protective of individual freedoms. 
France must have an ambitious vision of the role of the European Union in cybersecurity while 
reaffirming the responsibility of the Member States and the preservation of their sovereignty in terms 
of operational response. 
  
Page 92 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
France must continue to fully engage in the work devoted to cyber issues within the framework of 
the Atlantic Alliance, and contribute to it proactively in view of the Brussels Summit (July 2018). It 
will thus endeavour to continue strengthening the defence capabilities of NATO and the Allies, in 
particular via the Cyber Defence Pledge, and will ensure that cyber offensive effects are integrated 
into Alliance operations and missions in accordance with its interests. Public communication is likely 
to contribute to our own policy of discouraging computer attacks while opposing any hint of collective 
attribution will be developed. 
France must bring to European and international bodies a strategy to promote responsible behaviour 
by state and non-state systemic actors and to develop confidence-building measures in cyberspace, 
as well as its vision of the application of existing international law, including international 
humanitarian law in this area. This posture is all the more essential in the current international 
context of the failure of the last negotiations conducted within the framework of the group of 
government experts (GGE). Therefore, France must take the initiative to defend its interests in 
cyberspace, put forward its model and the ideas it carries in terms of international regulation of 
cyberspace. 
Finally, the development of a serene and secure cyberspace requires an effective fight against the 
criminals who operate there, including when attacks are launched from abroad. France must 
therefore continue to promote international cooperation in the fight against cybercrime, in particular 
by supporting the so-called Budapest Convention. France must endeavour to perfect, with its foreign 
partners, the mechanisms for mutual legal assistance in the fight against cybercrime and to continue 
the exchange of experience and technology in this field. 
  
Page 93 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3 Part 3. The State, the guarantor of society's cybersecurity 
France's cyber defence, beyond that of the state itself and operators of vital importance, involves 
raising the overall level of cybersecurity in society. To be effective, it is a question of considering, in 
a logic of digital sovereignty, a cyber defence-in-depth of our country integrating that of the citizens, 
the companies and the territorial collectivities. 
This is why this third part of the Cyber Defence Strategic Review proposes ambitious advances in 
terms of both regulation and the economics of cybersecurity. Public action must double that of 
economic agents, who remain primarily responsible for their IT security. The role of the State is to 
provide an increased effort in terms of training and skills management in the field of cybersecurity. 
3.1 Digital sovereignty, an essential component of national sovereignty 
Digital sovereignty can be understood as the capacity of France on the one hand, to act in a 
sovereign manner in the digital space, while preserving an autonomous capacity of appreciation, 
decision and action and on the other hand, to preserve the most traditional components of its 
sovereignty over new threats taking advantage of the increasing digitisation of society. Digital 
sovereignty therefore does not represent the desire to do everything nationally, which would be 
synonymous of withdrawal, but rather to retain autonomy and freedom of choice. 
The reflections conducted in the context of this strategic review converge on the need for our country 
to fully exercise its digital sovereignty. To this end, it is proposed to structure an industrial policy in 
digital matters, based on the mastery of key technologies (for example, IP stream encryption, attack 
detection probes, professional mobile radio). 
The challenges of cloud computing and artificial intelligence are also at the heart of any digital 
sovereignty strategy. 
3.1.1 Sovereign activities 
The mastery of certain technologies and services is essential to the exercise of our digital 
sovereignty. This mastery is largely based on the qualification by the State of a trusted offer of digital 
technologies and services. In addition, an industrial strategy based on "open source", provided that 
it is part of a thoughtful commercial approach, can allow French or European manufacturers to gain 
market share where they are now absent and thereby allowing France and the European Union to 
regain sovereignty. 
  
Page 94 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Identify the needs necessary to protect digital sovereignty 
Identifying the needs necessary to protect the interests of sovereignty is a preliminary step to 
determining the digital technologies and services whose availability, and even ownership, are 
essential for our country. These needs arise from the need to ensure the sovereign missions of the 
State and the critical activities of the OIV on the one hand and, on the other hand, to protect the 
nation's values, heritage and economic interests. 
For each of these families of needs, an analysis must be conducted in order to bring out the key 
technologies that support these needs. Subsequently, the strategic choices making it possible to 
respond to these needs must be identified, like the architectures of solutions adopted*. Finally, if 
there is no relevant solution or if technological developments are likely to change these strategic 
choices†, it is then necessary to identify the concrete avenues that could make it possible to propose 
suitable solutions. 
Assessing the need, proposing solutions and solution architectures, deciding on a strategy, in 
particular to own, control or bring to light key technologies, these must be the objectives of a public 
cybersecurity policy. The conduct of this policy requires dedicating specific resources, in charge of 
a technological watch and proposing choices. It could be a small inter-ministerial team (positioned 
with the general management of companies or the ANSSI) mobilizing for these works and its studies 
all the competent administrations (Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of the Armed Forces, 
Ministry of Interior, Digital Secretary of State, ANSSI, France Stratégie, etc.) as well as the industrial 
sector. It could usefully rely on the structures put in place within the framework of the Industrial 
Security Sector Committee (CoFIS) for regular and updated identification of critical technologies and 
disruptive technologies. 
Qualify an offer of trust 
The security of our supplies requires that demand can be satisfied by an offer of confidence and 
sufficiently diversified. Certain uses or certain functions require minimal control of the condition of 
the products used (approval, certifications, access to source codes, etc.). Finally, the satisfaction of 
certain needs calls for the development by a trusted industrialist of specific products according to 
the specifications of precise specifications. This product must remain completely free to use and for 
exclusive use and be subject to regular evaluation as to its security level‡. 
  
 
 
* This description of architecture and key technologies must include an analysis of the degree of control 
required over the technologies used, over confidentiality, if cryptography is used, this can be broken down 
into products (IP encryptors) or optionally into a communication offer (messaging, web, etc.). 
† This presentation must be made in the short and medium terms and specify the time horizons selected. 
‡ The level of security must be assessed with regard to the potential risks, whether they are endogenous 
and linked to product performance (failures / discontinuity of service, lack of performance), or exogenous 
and linked to different forms of attack (aimed at gaining access information, modify information, take control 
of systems). 
Page 95 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
To qualify an offer, the State must be able to identify the manufacturers and the products that are 
both eligible and available (see box below) for our security and sovereignty needs. Then, a certain 
number of criteria must be met, five of which are of particular importance: 
• control by the company of its industrial developments and processes*; 
• the degree of transparency accepted by the manufacturer on the manufacturing of its 
products (provision of source code for example); 
• the decision-making autonomy enjoyed by the manufacturer (to fix, for example, the 
roadmaps of its products, its architectures, etc.) which must not be subject to possible 
interference from undesirable third parties; 
• acceptance of controls by the manufacturer. The premises in which its products are 
developed must in particular be accessible (located in Europe) and its production 
processes must be subject to audit; 
• compliance, by the manufacturer, with rules for the protection of secrecy (process for 
enabling people and facilities, setting up security rules and restrictive areas, etc.)†. 
Nationality (French or European) is in itself a criterion to be taken into account in order to recognize 
the quality of a trusted industrialist. However, it is not always enforceable or relevant. 
Compliance with these different criteria must be able to be regularly assessed, as well as certain 
changes relating to the capital development of the company or its strategic choices. 
Establish an inventory of the existing supply of digital technologies and services 
essential to the maintenance of national sovereignty. 
For each of the key technologies, the establishment of the inventory of the existing offer is 
done on the basis of the following questioning scheme: 
 
  
 
 
* Any subcontracting should only be carried out on non-critical parts of the products (risk analysis 
supported). Or via trusted industrialists themselves. 
† It should be noted that the location of decision centres, research and development units has a direct 
impact on several of these criteria. 
Page 96 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Is an offer of trust necessary? 
a) If yes, do we have such an offer? Is it sustainable and capable of adapting to needs? 
If so, by what methods, under what conditions and at what cost? What are the requirements 
for the offer (maintenance of the availability of an open-source offer, competitive intensity 
and maintenance of several competing offers, adequate positioning in the value chain, 
substitutability of the product or service, etc.)? 
b) If not, is an alternative offer of confidence likely to emerge? Under what conditions and 
at what cost? 
This step must integrate all the technological (in principle in the roadmap of the 
industrialists concerned) and economic (including the “sovereign”, national or export 
market*) dimensions. It must also detail the various possible public actions and their scope 
(at least in order of magnitude) to be compared with the size of the market. The action can 
be financial (public support in capital or in subsidy for the manufacturer or its 
subcontractors, purchasing policy, etc.), regulatory (control of foreign investments) or take 
the form of aid for the supply of certain components. 
3.1.2 Three technologies, among others, whose mastery is essential to our digital sovereignty 
Among the key technologies whose mastery is necessary for the exercise of our digital sovereignty, 
the strategic review has chosen to highlight three. The choice was made on the essential nature of 
these technologies: encryption of communications, detection of computer attacks and professional 
mobile radios. The questions of cloud computing and artificial intelligence are also fraught with 
challenges. 
Communication encryption 
With the convergence of all digital communication protocols towards IP technology, the encryption 
of communications has gradually concentrated around encryptors dedicated to this technology 
(called “IP encryptors”), whether they are hardware equipment or pure software. 
The hardware or software developed by several manufacturers is non-interoperable, and none of 
the suppliers is able to meet all of the needs, which results in a very fragmented and small-scale 
market which relies almost exclusively on the public order. To avoid obsolescence and loss of 
competitiveness of products vis-à-vis their foreign competitors, in particular for the EU or NATO 
markets, but also for certain needs of our companies, it is necessary to revitalize our national offer. 
The ANSSI has undertaken in this sense, by means of a generic specification, to make the products 
interoperable, which should ultimately allow to have a complete coverage of the need and to 
relaunch an area frozen by investment costs on the supplier side and the migration costs on the 
customer side. For the success of this approach, it is essential that state customers, but also large 
industrial accounts, require interoperability in their calls for tenders. 
  
 
 
* Even sensitive security products are exported. 
Page 97 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Detecting computer attacks 
The capacity to supervise on a large scale the information systems of the infrastructures of the State 
and the OIV to detect if there are computer attacks constitutes a crucial stake, which supposes 
product suppliers and service providers of total confidence. The effectiveness of attack detection 
solutions depends on the integration of software or hardware components in strategic locations of 
an information system, which accentuates the need to master these components and to have all the 
guarantees on those who manufacture or implement them. 
The market for attack detection tools (probes and agents, see table) is largely dominated by foreign 
industrial players who do not necessarily meet the necessary confidence criteria. However, work 
has been undertaken to bring out in 2018 trusted solutions for France in terms of network flow 
analysis or local agents at IT stations. They are supplemented by specific state developments, 
reserved for the supervision of administrations. All these solutions (industrial and state-owned) are 
technologically dependent on critical third-party components for analysis, the confidence or 
durability of which are not fully acquired, whether they are industrial supplies or free software. 
There is also no leading national publisher in the field of fundamental technologies enabling the 
processing of large volumes of information. Alternative implementations, however, exist in the form 
of free software and can be integrated by trusted actors or by state teams. The sustainability of 
these implementations is not necessarily guaranteed and constitutes an important issue. 
The situation is similar in the areas of attack detection and malware analysis, where existing 
solutions rely mainly on foreign players or free software. We nevertheless note the emergence of 
national offers, the robustness of which remains to be confirmed or which are aimed at specific 
markets. The expertise associated with these activities, held by specialised teams within the State, 
is also being structured within a fabric of private service providers, through the qualification by the 
ANSSI of Providers of Security Incident Detection (PDIS). 
The creation and availability of updated and trusted databases of attack markers remain a point of 
weakness. No national industrialist providing such bases, sovereign detection solutions remain 
entirely dependent on public bases. The ANSSI has an autonomous capacity for developing 
markers, the provision of which to trusted private actors is being organised. However, the ability of 
only state teams to change scale and cover all the needs for markers remains all the more 
problematic as the current extension of the field of detection to client workstations, servers and the 
cloud increases the workload. 
  
Page 98 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
More generally, the lack of national or European actors in the field of Threat Intelligence reduces 
our capacity to have massive information on cyber threats. This situation risks over the long-term 
national capabilities to search for new algorithmic detection solutions. This dropout risks being 
accentuated by the development of new detection methods based on artificial intelligence. However, 
responses to this soon expected real technological breakthrough are strongly linked to access to 
such data sets. The emergence of a benchmark industrial player, national or European, in the field 
of Threat intelligence and the development of markers, is for these reasons eminently desirable and 
should be sought. 
The essential components of a complete detection solution 
A complete detection solution combines several means and capabilities: 
- sensors making it possible to observe the activity of an information system in real-time, 
through network flows (probes) or the operation of computer stations (agents), whether on 
isolated stations or cloud architectures; 
- capabilities for collecting, indexing, processing and storing large volumes of data, from 
sensors or the collection of operating logs for example; 
- methods and algorithms to distinguish normal activities from malicious activities, based 
on information from sensors. This discrimination can be affected by the recognition of 
signatures characteristic of attacks and "behavioural" anomalies; 
- bases of markers, including signatures of attacks classified because of their sensitivity, 
and more generally a knowledge of the main adversary operating modes; 
- an ability to analyse detected attacks, enabling doubt to be raised and the signature base 
to be enriched. 
These components, in turn, depend on key technologies (high-speed analysis of network 
packets or files, Big data processing, reverse engineering or secure detonation tools of 
malicious code, etc.), on the integration capacity of these technologies, and specific 
expertise. 
  
Page 99 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Professional mobile radios 
In twenty-five years of existence, professional mobile radio networks have demonstrated their 
usefulness for the security forces and rescue units. The needs have however evolved and the 
current networks are both saturated and technically limited. 
The organisation of forces and the concentration of resources on limited geographic areas make 
the technical limitations of current networks even more manifest (number of group conferences, 
registration capacity of terminals in the area, etc.) which, combined with expectations of users 
generate frustration. The performance of the terminals entrusted to them – whose ergonomics are 
closer to the mobile phones of the 1990s than current smartphones – increasingly leads them to use 
their professional or private smartphones as a means of communication. Security forces or rescue 
services also complain of insufficient coverage, both outside and inside buildings*. Operational 
managers criticize the absence of functions now perceived as essential: video, access to the 
information system, access to public telephone networks, etc. 
For the operational reasons mentioned above and with a view to protecting the confidentiality of 
communications, a new generation of professional mobile radios should be developed for the benefit 
of the security forces and rescue units. It would be a question of providing a network offer favouring 
the interoperability and the coordination of the forces and the means engaged on the ground, in 
particular in situation of operational crisis, without functional regressions compared to the current 
means (in particular compared to the commercial services mobile phone)†. 
In order to go beyond the limits of current technologies, the future solution should rely on standard 
equipment and as much as possible on existing operator networks, thus limiting costs and training 
effort for agents. It should also be able to evolve over time (in particular to ensure the transition to 
5G). An opening to operational service with limited coverage in 2022 and across the whole of Paris 
in the run-up to the Olympic Games in 2024, appears technically possible. 
Due to the convergence observed between this field and that of mobility security (telephony, 
messaging, social networks, etc.), this strategic review recommends conducting a global analysis 
to see how to pool an infrastructure and products to respond to these two needs. Like the RIE, the 
DINSIC could provide administrations with mobility services allowing in particular secure and 
resilient access to RIE data. 
  
 
 
* The problem is not so much that of the lack of coverage as the differential that exists with commercial 
mobile telephone networks. 
† Among the issues of non-regression is the subject of direct mode (direct communication, outside 
infrastructure, between two terminals). 
Page 100 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3.1.3 Harnessing the full potential of artificial intelligence techniques for cybersecurity 
The challenges of sovereignty around artificial intelligence (AI) are considerable and push all the 
major powers to invest massively in research and industrial developments. Following the publication 
of several reports on the subject (in particular the report "France Artificial Intelligence" and the report 
"For an artificial intelligence controlled, useful and demystified" of the Parliamentary Office for the 
Evaluation of Scientific and Technical Choices (OPECST of March 2017*), a mission was entrusted 
on September 8, 2017, by the Government to the deputy Cédric VILLANI, in order to refine, deepen 
and prioritize the work already carried out on artificial intelligence. The conclusions of this mission 
could then be broken down into a concrete roadmap laying the foundations for long-term French 
and European action, pending these†, only the links between cyber defence and artificial intelligence 
are analysed in this part of the strategic review. 
The first issue already identified in the Paragraphs of this strategic review devoted to memory (see 
part l) and in the France Artificial Intelligence report of March 2017 is that of cybersecurity of artificial 
intelligence systems. Elon Musk, after an electric vehicle of his brand TESLA was hacked by 
researchers from the company TENCENT, stressed in this regard, in July 2017 before the American 
authorities‡, that the future of autonomous vehicles was conditioned by cybersecurity. Whether in 
learning phases, which may involve taking into account sensitive data in terms of security, or during 
the use phases, AI systems must be protected in order to prevent an attacker from stealing 
information or take control of it. For reasons of efficiency and cost, the cybersecurity of AI systems 
must be thought out ab initio and be integrated into their development from the design stage. 
  
 
 
* Synthesis report France Artificial Intelligence, March 2017: wwrw.economie.gouv.fr/France-IA-intelligence-
artificiel. Report for a useful and demystified controlled artificial intelligence, Claude de Ganay, Dominique 
Gillot, OPECST, March 2017: http://www.senat.fr/fileadmimages/opecst/quatrepages.pdf. 
† The objective assigned to the mission consists in studying the actions necessary to allow France and 
Europe to be at the forefront of the economy of artificial intelligence, to describe the best international 
practices of application of these technologies at the service of the transformation and improvement of public 
policies, identify priority applications to deploy within the public sphere and open the field to national 
reflection on the impacts of artificial intelligence, considering its effects on the work the ethical issues it 
raises (http: //www.villani201Zeu/blog/mission.villani.sur.l.intelligence.artificiel). 
‡ Speech by Elon MUSK, July 15, 2017, before the National Governor Association. 
Page 101 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Beyond the issue of cybersecurity of AI systems, the application of artificial intelligence techniques 
to the field of cyber defence offers promising prospects. The IT field lends itself easily to simulation 
or automation, greatly facilitating experimentation and learning by reinforcement from available and 
labelled data (malware databases, vulnerability database, network database, …). Artificial 
intelligence techniques have already been used to detect an attack among network flows or 
malicious software, but also to recover the PIN code of a smartphone, the key of a smart card or 
even perform operations of phishing, through tweets adapted to the habits of a target*. In 2016, 
DARPA, the Pentagon’s research agency, launched a cyber challenge to test the ability of AI 
systems to detect and fix software flaws. If the performance of the Mayhem software, winner of this 
competition, does not match the skills of the vulnerability researchers at the DEFCON 2016 
conference†, it is likely that the machines will exceed the best world experts in a short time. 
The mastery of artificial intelligence systems applied to cyber defence is therefore a major issue for 
France because, used in support of state experts, these machines will considerably increase their 
efficiency. However, if French research in AI is at the forefront in many fields, it is unfortunately only 
little mobilised on the objectives related to cybersecurity. In connection with our industry, an effort 
should therefore be made to correct this situation, particularly in the fields of attack detection, 
vulnerability search, analysis and categorisation of malware. 
Beyond the classic research support actions, access to quality, updated and categorised data sets 
is a major determinant of research in artificial intelligence. In its application to cyber defence, it is 
clear that the publicly accessible datasets concerning computer attacks and malicious code are of 
small size and of poor quality. While certain private players (publishers of antivirus or detection 
solutions in particular) have high-quality data, these are generally not shared, and the players 
concerned are mostly non-European. The consolidation of public data sets, and access by 
researchers, under conditions to be determined, to data sets held by private actors and the State, 
constitute capital challenges in this respect. 
  
 
 
* https://www.bIackhat.com/docs/us-16/materiaIs/us-16-Seymour-Tully-Weaponizing-Data-Science-For-
SociaI-Engineering-Automated-E2E-SpearPhishing-On-Twitter.pdf 
† https://www.computerworId.com/articIe/3105044/security/mayhem-supercomputer-takes-on-humans-at-
defcon.html 
Page 102 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3.1.4 For cloud computing, invent a regulation and data protection strategy 
Data protection, the real fuel of the digital economy, can only be envisaged at the European level. 
In particular, it will be necessary to find a fair balance between good data protection and their free 
movement on European territory, which is likely to encourage the full emergence of a European 
digital single market. States should be able to maintain access to data, especially the most sensitive, 
which they should be able to continue to regulate. However, this approach can only be truly relevant 
with the implementation of a strategy to promote the development of cloud computing trust offers. 
For the sole hosting of their data or for the hosting of complete applications, organisations tend to 
move an increasing part of their information systems to cloud platforms operated by third-party 
providers. Outsourcing to a cloud is likely to offer proven benefits to the customer, in terms of cost 
as well as reliability and flexibility. It also provides an attractive response to the growing complexity 
of IT and the difficulty, for many organisations, of having all the necessary skills. 
The development of the cloud is now accelerated by the strategy adopted by the majority of software 
publishers, which aims to make them evolve from a product marketing model (software installed at 
the customer) to that of a service provision (client access to software hosted in the publisher's cloud). 
This trend is tending to become widespread, including for highly specialised and particularly critical 
software, such as that which provides centralised routing of network flows for electronic 
communications operators. 
For some organisations that do not have sufficient internal skills (SMEs for example), the use of the 
cloud can prove beneficial to their IT security. It can indeed bring a certain resistance to non-targeted 
IT attacks of moderate technical level. The use of the cloud nonetheless carries new risks and the 
strong domination of the cloud market by a small number of foreign players, mainly American and 
to a lesser extent Chinese (but whose size and number are constantly growing), gives at these risks 
a dimension of national sovereignty. 
First of all, on the legal level, the use of the cloud raises the question of the law applicable to hosted 
data and applications, as long as the hosting is done outside the national or European territory, or 
that the nationality of the provider subjects it to constraints legal whose scope may include an 
extraterritorial character. In addition to the problem of illegitimate access to data that could arise 
from this, consideration should also be given to the possibility for cloud users to circumvent certain 
binding provisions of national law, in particular with regard to cybersecurity. 
  
Page 103 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
On the technical side, then, the use of the cloud can offer the service provider complete control of 
the data and software entrusted to it by its customers. A malicious provider could thus, on his 
initiative or at the request of a State, infringe the confidentiality of data (spying), but also their 
availability (sabotage). The provider could also be the victim of a computer attack, with the same 
consequences. This risk is particularly significant when systems hosted in the cloud could, in the 
event of a malfunction, cause the destabilisation of an economic player, or even of a State. 
Finally, economically, outsourcing to the cloud can lead to a risk of increased technological 
dependence on the service provider. Thus, the marketing of software in the form of a service* in the 
cloud transforms the customer, previously the owner of the software, into a simple tenant, dependent 
on the pricing imposed by its provider, and often without recourse due to the lack of alternative 
solutions or reversibility. 
The so-called “sovereign” cloud offers, put in place by national operators funded by the state, could 
have provided an answer to the strategic problem of locating the cloud and trusting its operator. 
However, these offers are struggling to establish their economic viability. On the other hand, it 
should be noted that other national cloud operators manage to remain competitive and masters of 
their technological solution, whether on the general hosting market or on a niche market. 
In recent years, several large non-European cloud providers have also established partnerships with 
European operators, allowing the latter to market the solutions of the former by ensuring their 
hosting. The agreement between DEUTSCHE TELEKOM (DT) and MICROSOFT is the most 
emblematic case. Established at the instigation of the German government to respond to security 
concerns, this agreement enables DT to host MICROSOFT cloud software solutions in its own data 
centres and to market them, in particular for the benefit of German administrations. In France, OVH 
is also positioning itself as a host for certain MICROSOFT solutions. 
Faced with these findings, this strategic review proposes to implement the following four series of 
measures. 
1. Establish, in connection with the work carried out under the Public Action 2022 programme, a 
global policy of recourse to Cloud by the State, by combining recourse to Cloud solutions under 
control of administration and that to Cloud providers benefiting from a qualification by the ANSSI 
(SecNumCloud). 
  
 
 
* For example, replacing Microsoft Office software with the Office 365 Cloud service. 
Page 104 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
2. At the same time, encourage the development of encryption solutions for the cloud. Current 
encryption techniques only respond to very simple cloud use cases, mainly related to storage, but 
nevertheless present an undeniable interest, for example for outsourced backup devices. In 
addition, the development of encryption means that can be extended to other uses, in particular the 
so-called “homomorphic” encryption techniques, which allow encrypted data to be processed in the 
cloud, and no longer only at the storage, should remain a priority prospect. 
3. Support European strategic autonomy on the subject, both by investing in disruptive technologies 
in the field likely to bring out the champions of tomorrow, as well as by ensuring tax measures to 
restore fairness between European players and certain of their competitors who largely escape tax 
or who are not subject to the same regulations. 
4. Establish a global trust framework to enable companies, communities and individuals to assess 
the risks of use and guide the market by developing the SecNumCloud qualification, including at 
European level. 
3.1.5 Regulating the production and export of arms and cyber offensive activities 
The emergence of cybersecurity challenges and the desire of a growing number of countries to have 
cyber offensive capabilities have led many manufacturers to develop such means. At the same time, 
the intangible nature of these technologies makes controls difficult, where they exist. Limiting the 
proliferation of offensive technologies, in particular by maintaining the principle of applicability of 
arms control and dual-use technologies to the cyber domain therefore represents a key issue for 
the stability of cyberspace. 
In 2013, the category of “intrusion software” was included in the list of dual-use goods of the 
Wassenaar Arrangement. Three new control entries have been included in this international 
agreement: systems (hardware), software (software) and technologies enabling the development 
and use of intrusion software. This development made it possible to lay the first milestones for 
regulating the global trade in offensive cyber tools. The modification of the Wassenaar list was 
integrated in 2014 into the list of dual-use goods of the European Union. The implementation of this 
control allows the national authorities to ascertain the conditions of end-use of the exported capacity 
and thus to refuse operations which could be considered as risky. Some countries participating in 
the Wassenaar Arrangement, such as the United States, have not yet transposed or implemented 
these new controls and plead for a relaxation of these rules. 
It is now important to consolidate this development by working to deepen the export control regime 
in the cyber domain. Two options can be considered in order to continue the work undertaken so 
far. The first is the promotion of a universal standard of behaviour by which States commit to 
controlling the export of offensive cyber tools and techniques according to methods to be defined. 
The implementation of this standard should be adapted to the capacity of the competent national 
authorities to exercise effective and harmonised control and to respect the legitimate interests of 
cybersecurity companies and the world of research. The second option is to consider the advisability 
of adding certain software to the list of war materials, since they are not only designed to be 
punctually introduced into a system but to last or damage their target, constituting thus a veritable 
“digital weapon”. 
  
Page 105 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
To implement these regulatory mechanisms it is essential to try to categorize these tools. Tools are 
software or sets of software that can find multiple applications whether to test the security of a 
system for defensive purposes, to carry out intrusion activities for intelligence, obstruction or even 
purely for profit to steal money or data which can then be converted into cash. An intrusion tool to 
extract intelligence can also very easily be enriched with a few lines of code to become a very 
effective instrument of destruction. Under these conditions, it is difficult to distinguish, among these 
tools, those which can be qualified as digital weapons and, as such, be controlled as are, for their 
manufacture and their marketing, weapons of war. 
It is however possible to classify cyber defence software into four categories allowing to fix rules 
relating to their production, their use and their export: 
1. The first category includes "security intrusion tools". This software which makes it possible to 
discreetly penetrate a system and to exfiltrate or modify information is marketed in order to test the 
robustness of an information system. This type of tool is not intended to integrate codes exploiting 
zero-day vulnerabilities or loads capable of destroying a system. Designed for relatively limited 
operations, these tools do not include very advanced functionalities. This type of product 
nevertheless falls into the class of dual-use goods, insofar as, slightly modified, it can be transformed 
into destructive software. However, it remains a manual tool for punctual intrusion. 
2. A second category is "data capture tools", which make it possible to massively collect individual 
data, for example from smartphones or personal computers and to process it almost automatically. 
These tools can include zero-day operating and steering functions. They can be installed over a 
long time but are not intended to penetrate complex information systems. These tools, deployed 
within a legal framework, are useful for the police and the justice system. Capturing data at the 
source makes it possible to overcome certain obstacles encountered by legal interceptions made 
by operators, especially in the case of encryption of the applications used to communicate. The 
dangerousness of such tools presupposes close control over their dissemination. 
  
Page 106 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3. The third category corresponds to "targeted computer weapons". These tools, with advanced 
functionalities, make it possible to take control over a long time of varied but targeted systems, by 
allowing intelligence exploitation or destruction of the system at the desired time. Their purposes 
combine those of the first two categories, which in terms of use and effect cannot be obtained by 
simply superimposing the tools of the first two categories. Much more sophisticated, their creation 
requires ad hoc developments. They correspond to tools used by the most advanced groups of 
attackers. 
4. The last category is made up of “massive computer weapons”, making it possible to take control 
or destroy a large number of devices. It can be malware that can replicate and propagate 
independently without precise targeting. These tools are particularly harmful because of the risks of 
uncontrolled collateral damage that they generate. 
Most software and products, falling under these four categories are controlled as dual-use goods in 
our legislation* or regulated as tools that can invade privacy (Articles R226-1 to R226-12 of the Penal 
Code). The Article of the Penal Code prohibits moreover the possession or the provision of tools 
allowing to be introduced into an automated system of data processing except for reason of research 
or data-processing security. 
Less by its rigorous nature than by its complexity, these regulations have not encouraged French 
companies to invest in the development of computer weapons, or even intrusion or data capture 
tools. However, countries like the United States, Israel or India have set up an industry in this field 
which is now setting out to conquer the world market. Certain products sold by foreign companies, 
although not qualified as "trusted", are of definite interest for the intelligence, police or justice 
services. This software makes it possible to ensure the capture of data with regular updates which 
adapt them to the evolutions of the terminals marketed. European countries are not left out. English, 
Italian or German companies have thus created effective capture tools, although not always 
sufficiently hardened†. This European situation should be all the more emphasised since most of 
the member countries of the European Union, including France, are engaged in the fight against 
terrorism and major trafficking and have, as such, authorised in their legislation the installation of 
electronic capture systems for the purpose of spying on criminal and jihadist networks. The 
European market today appears to be sufficient to make industrialists who manufacture this type of 
product viable and create competition between players, while preventing these products from being 
diverted for malicious purposes. Measures to protect these manufacturers from takeovers by foreign 
capital are also essential. 
  
 
 
* Decree 2001-1192 of December 13, 2001 relating to export, import and transfer control of dual-use goods 
and technologies modified by Decree 2010-292 of March 18, 2010 
† Thus, the two European leaders (the Italian HACKING TEAM and the German-English GAMMA) have 
recently suffered computer intrusions demonstrating the low level of security of their systems. The attackers 
stole all of their data and published it on the internet, revealing both the identity of their customers and their 
expertise. 
Page 107 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
While the need is not debatable, we face the double risk of using capture products that are 
insufficiently secure, or that are not considered to be trusted. So, when the tools developed by the 
Italian company HACKING TEAM were made public following a theft of their source code, it 
appeared that the company had hidden a trap in all the tools for capturing data from their customers. 
It therefore seems necessary today to harmonize the manufacture, import and export of these tools, 
unless we take the risk of delivering this particularly sensitive market to non-European suppliers. 
France could promote, particularly within the European Union, a regulatory approach to the 
production and export of cyber defence software, based on the four categories of products 
introduced above: 
• the treatment of first category tools as dual-use goods raises questions insofar as other 
States do not apply this control. Adopting it unilaterally would penalize our manufacturers 
vis-à-vis other actors. These tools could thus be freely manufactured in Europe, respecting 
a code of ethics, and used by the private sector in a logic restricted to security tests. Their 
export outside the European Union should be accompanied by rules of use and be able to 
be checked a posteriori; 
• second category tools could be manufactured by manufacturers subject to transparency 
and control obligations, for uses exclusively under government responsibility. The import 
and export of these products outside the European Union could be prohibited, or at least 
strictly controlled; 
• third category tools could be developed only under state responsibility and used only by 
the State 
• the manufacture and use of fourth category weapons would be prohibited. 
3.2 Cybersecurity regulation 
Guarantor of society's cybersecurity, the State intervenes in this area as a prescriber, reformer and 
provider of security solutions. Along with the Parliament which enacts the law, the government plays 
a normative role in the field of cybersecurity. 
Responsible for coordinating and coordinating public policies contributing to the national security 
strategy, the SGDSN, which reports to the Prime Minister, is thus a cybersecurity operator. It is he 
who proposes to the Prime Minister and implements government policy in the area of information 
systems security. To this end, it has the ANSSI, which is attached to it. 
  
Page 108 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In collaboration with the competent administrations, the ANSSI examines and prepares government 
decisions relating to digital security and that of sensitive data. It also participates in the construction 
and maintenance of networks and secure terminals for government services. The agency thus 
supports the offices of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and members of the 
Government in securing their information systems. As part of its normative role, it is responsible for 
defining security standards, issuing security visas and qualifying service providers. 
Reflections carried out within the framework of this strategic review, emerged the need to improve 
the current certification framework in order to contribute to the improvement of product security. 
3.2.1 The normative role of the ANSSI 
Defining security standards 
Created to provide the State with an authoritative administration on cybersecurity issues, ANSSI 
was built around state-of-the-art scientific and technical expertise, further enriched by the 
experience acquired in processing wire of cyberattacks at the highest level of sophistication. 
Strengthened by its mission and skills, ANSSI has naturally established itself as a benchmark for 
defining the relevant security standards to ensure the protection of the most sensitive data and 
information systems, starting with the protection of secrecy of national defence. 
For these same reasons, the ANSSI was responsible for negotiating security standards aimed at 
ensuring data protection and classified information systems in multinational frameworks (for 
example within the North Atlantic Organisation, within the European Union, etc.). 
This standard-setting activity has gradually spread over time and at the same time as the affirmation 
of its role as a national authority, to cover in particular: 
• the protection of digital exchanges between citizens and the administration on the one 
hand and between administrations on the other, by Ordinance through the General 
Security Reference System (RGS); 
• the security of state information systems, by way of a Prime Minister's circular through the 
Information Systems Security Policy (PSSIE); 
• the protection of sensitive state information (inter-ministerial instruction 901) 
• the protection of the information systems of the OIVs participating in supporting their 
missions of vital importance, by legislative and regulatory means through Articles 1332-6-
1 to 1332-6-7 of the defence regulations. 
More recently, the ANSSI has been entrusted with the production of an Ordinance and Decrees in 
the Council of State relating to trust services within the framework of the law for a digital republic, 
with particular regard to electronic identity, registered electronic and digital safes. 
  
Page 109 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Finally, the ANSSI participated, as a leader at the national level, in the negotiation of the following 
European regulations and in ensuring their interpretation or transposition at the national level: 
• Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 
2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal 
market and repealing Directive 1999/93/EC, known as the 'eIDAS' regulation "; 
• Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 
concerning measures intended to ensure a high common level of security of networks and 
information systems in the Union, known as the "NIS" directive. 
The now proven impact of regulations brought in or negotiated by the ANSSI confirms the choice of 
entrusting the national authority with the definition of legal standards specific to digital security. This 
is particularly true when it comes to developing confidence in digital uses. In this regard, the decision 
to designate the ANSSI as the authority for the certification of electronic identity means is certainly 
a step in the right direction. 
In addition, while the digital transformation is in full swing, that the breaks in terms of technology 
and uses are linked in digital, and to the extent that digital security – essential condition of confidence 
in the digital transformation – remains today little regulated, there is no reason to consider that we 
are faced with a stack of standards in the field of digital security. In this context, it seems that 
government directives advocating that the implementation of any new standard is accompanied by 
the abolition of two already existing standards should, in this case, be subject to an exception for 
the field of digital security. 
In addition to this exception, the ANSSI must, in the new standards it will be called upon to propose, 
as well as in the revision of existing standards, pay particular attention to guarantee the 
proportionality, consistency and legibility of the regulations on digital security, to simplify 
implementation by organisations subject to more than one. 
Finally, it appears that compliance with the standards enacted by the ANSSI is sometimes 
insufficient for two reasons. On the one hand, following the example of the general security 
reference system, the implementation of existing sanctions regimes is sometimes only difficult to 
envisage because they are too little proportioned and do not allow escalation. On the other hand, 
following the example of the security policy for State information systems published by circular, the 
level of standards is sometimes insufficient in the hierarchy of standards. Particular attention should 
therefore be paid to improving the effectiveness of the standards defined by the ANSSI by 
guaranteeing relevant sanctions regimes and the most suitable levels of standards. 
  
Page 110 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Security visas 
The ANSSI has been issuing security visas for many years, on the basis of in-depth assessments 
launched on the initiative of the suppliers concerned, relating to an extended typology of security 
products: hardware or software, performing encryption functions, electronic signature, 
interconnection between secure networks, authentication, etc. These visas are essentially of distinct 
types: 
• certification attests to the robustness of a security product with regard to the requirements 
(nature of the security functions, level of the attacker) set by a sponsor, who is not 
necessarily the State. It is thus presented as a toolbox allowing various contractors (State, 
private operators – banks for example -, independent authorities) to define their security 
criteria and to have the satisfaction of these criteria verified by a third party; 
• the qualification by the State is worth recommendation of use in a given context; it involves 
product certification supplemented by verification of security and updating requirements 
claimed from suppliers over time. The qualification is valid both for the specific needs of 
the administrations and services of the State as for those of the OIV; 
• approval is a regulatory decision which authorizes the use of a solution previously qualified 
for processing classified information. 
The methods applied by private assessment centres certified by the ANSSI have largely 
demonstrated their relevance in terms of guarantee and responsiveness. The general framework 
for issuing security visas set up by the ANSSI also constitutes a very important lever for the 
development of the security of products manufactured or deployed in France. 
However, the need for evaluation of increasingly varied products is increasing. They are no longer 
only products specifically designed to provide security for computer networks, but also industrial 
controllers, connected objects, etc. If the existing evaluation framework has been successfully 
extended to a significant proportion of these new needs, it is however totally unsuited to the 
foreseeable development of future certification and qualification requests. 
Providers 
In addition to product qualification, the ANSSI has more recently established a system for the 
qualification of service providers and IT security relating to their level of security (competence, the 
security of their own information system, data partitioning customer, as well as on quality of service 
commitments, defined in business standards. 
This qualification concerns cybersecurity providers: Information systems security audit providers 
(PASSI), Security Incident Detection Providers (PDIS) and Security Incident Response Providers 
(PRIS). 
  
Page 111 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
It also applies to secure digital service providers, which provide guarantees in the execution of a 
digital service rather than specific cybersecurity expertise. This category includes trusted providers 
provided under the general security repository and the eIDAS regulation (providers of electronic 
signature, provision of electronic certificates, time stamping, etc.), and providers of cloud computing 
(cloud)* 
Cybersecurity providers are qualified on the basis of an assessment of their business competence, 
on the one hand, and of the technical and organisational measures by which they ensure the 
protection of their customers' data, on the other. They provide expertise similar to that implemented 
by the ANSSI in its own missions, and therefore constitute an important vector for disseminating the 
know-how of the ANSSI. Their assistance also makes it possible to meet the needs of the private 
sector. The PASSI qualification process started in 2013 and, at the end of 2017, there were fifty 
service providers qualified or in the process of qualification. This rise in power reveals both the 
dynamism of this field of activity and the search by companies in the sector for accreditation by the 
ANSSI. 
Fewer, secure digital service providers are assessed by the ANSSI according to a logic of 
compliance with a standard-setting, the security requirements applicable to the service they deliver. 
3.2.2 Improve the certification framework to improve product security 
The existing certification framework, although modulating the level of requirements according to 
security needs, remains nonetheless very focused on high-level certifications. It is ill-suited to the 
evaluation of products of current use (like connected objects), for which it presents a prohibitive cost 
and deadlines. 
This is why this strategic review proposes the implementation, in addition to the existing certification 
framework, reserved for products and services at the top of the spectrum, of a basic cybersecurity 
certification. The latter could be inspired by existing systems in contexts other than cybersecurity, 
such as the CE marking required for the marketing of certain goods or services within the European 
area. This basic cybersecurity certification would essentially proceed from a compliance analysis, 
based on a predefined specification. This compliance check could be delegated to a private 
organisation, with the involvement of the public authorities limited to indirect actions (approval of 
private assessment centres). This approach appears suitable for certifications for which certain 
obligations of the current system, such as carrying out a “free” vulnerability analysis, outside 
specifications, and the issuance of certificates by the ANSSI, seem less justified. 
  
 
 
* The general security reference system, taken in application of Decree 2010-112 of February 2, 2010 taken 
for the application of Articles 9, 10 and 12 of Ordinance 2005-1516 of December 8, 2005 relating to 
electronic exchanges between users and the administrative authorities, is the regulatory framework enabling 
confidence to be established in exchanges within the administration and with citizens. Its purpose is to 
strengthen users' confidence in the electronic services made available by the administrative authorities and 
thus imposes itself on them as a binding framework while being adaptable and adapted to the challenges 
and needs of all types of administrative authority. 
The “elDAS” Regulation 910/2014 of July 23, 2014 aims to increase confidence in electronic transactions 
within the internal market. It establishes a common foundation for secure electronic interactions between 
citizens, businesses and public authorities. 
Page 112 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
By reducing the costs and times of certification, this reform is likely to favour the emergence of a 
product offer consistent with the need. The implementation of a basic certification mechanism could 
rely on certain conformity control providers with the help of the ANSSI. The national cybersecurity 
authority could contribute to the definition of basic certification protocols, accredit centres of 
expertise and evaluation, and animate the network, notably through training cycles. 
After an initial implementation based on volunteering, the incorporation of this elementary 
certification into the regulations, by integrating for example elementary security rules in the 
European directives relating to the goods targeted by the CE marking would significantly increase 
its scope. and impact, transforming an optional differentiator into a prerequisite for market access. 
Finally, it can be noted that the establishment of self-declaration mechanisms for compliance with 
security requirements is a recurrent demand from many digital solution providers, who put forward 
the minimum cost. A self-declarative framework provides only weak guarantees of security, and 
therefore does not constitute a priority for the State. However, it would be counterproductive to 
oppose the emergence of such schemes on the initiative of the private sector, in particular when 
this approach is supported by a representative group of providers of security solutions. A minimum 
support of such initiatives by the State, relating in particular to the definition of associated 
specifications, would encourage the dissemination of good development practices, including in 
sectors reluctant to turn to certification. 
3.2.3 Responsibility by environment: involving all sectoral players to raise our level of 
cybersecurity 
When the interests of the Nation justify it, in particular with regard to defence and national security 
or services essential to the maintenance of critical societal or economic activities, a cross-sectoral 
approach to cyber risk is essential. Responsibility is then entrusted to an inter-ministerial authority, 
the national security and defence authority for information systems. Such an approach guarantees 
a homogeneous and ambitious understanding of risk, independent in its objectives of sector 
specificities, making it possible to reduce cyber risk and prepare for the management of a possible 
major crisis. This approach is primarily intended to guarantee a minimum level of cybersecurity for 
the most critical entities, in order to protect the fundamental interests of France in the face of the 
cyber threat. 
  
Page 113 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Although cross-sectoral, this type of approach requires, in its implementation, close coordination 
between the national authority and the key players in sectoral regulation, both ministerial supervision 
and any services with national competence, public establishments* and independent administrative 
authorities† in order to ensure a good articulation between the different policies applying to the 
sectors. 
However, cross-sectoral approaches do not allow a detailed understanding of the risk management 
specific to each sector. In addition, the digital transformation, which leads in particular to the massive 
connection of objects to the Internet (medical devices, vehicles, buildings, cities, etc.), now requires 
the risk of cyberattacks to be taken into account at the sectoral level, particularly when these objects 
are likely to have a direct and material impact on personal security. Indeed, only the sectoral players 
have the business knowledge necessary to qualify the impacts of a possible computer attack on 
these objects and therefore to assess in a relevant way the cyber risk associated with their 
deployment. 
These findings highlight the now imperative need for key players in sectoral regulation to understand 
the risk of cyberattacks in the same way as other risks and, if necessary, after a risk analysis carried 
out by business experts, to adopt appropriate measures, for example by issuing suitable 
cybersecurity requirements. 
Sensitize the key players in sectoral regulation to the risk of cyberattacks 
The key players in sectoral regulation generally do not have cybersecurity expertise. As such, the 
understanding and taking into account the risk of cyberattacks by these actors are extremely 
underdeveloped, even non-existent. At a time of digital transformation, they must now understand 
this risk, using the risk analysis methods available and calling on external assistance, provided by 
qualified service providers, or even by the ANSSI itself, in order to analyse relevant cyber risks at 
the sectoral level and identify those that deserve action in order to be reduced. 
Provide tools to key players in sector regulation 
  
 
 
* For example, the National Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health Security (ANSES), the 
National Agency for the Security of Medicines and Health Products (ANSM), the Directorate for the Security 
of 'civil aviation (DSAC). 
† For example, the Supervisory Authority and Resolutions (ACPR), the Financial Markets Authority (AMF), 
the National Frequency Agency (ANFR), the Regulatory Authority for Electronic Communications and Posts 
(ARCEP), the Nuclear Security Authority (ASN), the Energy Regulatory Commission (CRE). 
Page 114 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
When the assessment of the exposure to the risk of cyberattacks has been carried out in a sector 
and concluded that there is a need to reduce certain risks via regulatory requirements, whether at 
national or European level, the key players in the regulation of the sector must be able to design the 
necessary cybersecurity measures, simply express their cybersecurity requirements within the 
sectoral regulations for which they are responsible, and monitor compliance with the requirements. 
However, these actors do not have, and generally will not have to have, cybersecurity expertise. 
Consequently, they should be able to rely on tools enabling them to define their security criteria and 
to have the satisfaction of these criteria verified by competent third parties. The European 
cybersecurity certification framework proposed in September 2017 by the European Commission, 
as part of the “cyber package” designed for this purpose and currently being negotiated, should 
make it possible to meet this need. 
Prioritize the commitment of ANSSI resources in its work with the key players in sectoral 
regulation 
By drawing on its expertise in awareness-raising, and thanks to the tools and methods it has 
developed in the area of cyberattack risk management, the ANSSI is able to effectively support the 
key players in sectoral regulation in order to allow them to understand cyber risk in general, to 
analyse the corresponding risks at the sector level which concerns them and to identify those calling 
for corrective action (risk reduction and strengthening of the level of cybersecurity). 
Nevertheless, as a national authority, the priority of the ANSSI must remain the protection of the 
fundamental interests of France through a cross-sectoral approach to risk. It is therefore important 
that the ANSSI prioritize its actions to support the key players in sectoral regulation. 
Three criteria naturally contribute to determining the level of priority that the ANSSI must give to the 
support of actors in a sector at a given time: the next arrival or in progress of a phenomenon of 
rupture linked to the digital transformation of the sector (for example, autonomous vehicles), the 
level of cyber threat to the sector, and the level of risk to personal security. 
3.2.4 Trusted providers: developing a range of cyber defence services 
Cybersecurity providers currently cover, through the specific expertise they provide, three of the four 
stages of the life cycle of a secure information system: security verification (PASSI), long-term 
security management (PDIS) and reaction to attack (PRIS). However, no qualification scheme 
covers the skills necessary for the initial stage of designing a secure information system. It should 
also be noted that existing providers do not strictly cover all of the skills contributing to other stages: 
for example, there is no provider specializing in security certification (see glossary), or in maintaining 
security condition*. 
  
 
 
* It should however be stressed that these uncovered competences fall more particularly under the 
obligations of the entity responsible for the information system, and are therefore difficult to outsource. 
Page 115 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Project management assistance providers 
It therefore seems desirable to complete the catalogue of qualified cybersecurity providers with a 
new type of provider specialised in the initial phase of designing a secure information system. 
Indeed, certain specific expertise mobilised at this stage of the life cycle, in particular that relating to 
risk analysis and security architecture, is not widespread within administrations and companies, and 
in fact already largely under-processed by these entities to project management assistance 
providers. The implementation of a qualification scheme focused on these trades would provide 
significant guarantees in terms of competence and confidence in this use of outsourcing. 
Basic level qualification 
The various qualification standards for cybersecurity providers are currently designed to meet the 
high level of requirements specific to sensitive government systems and vital information systems 
for OIVs. This positioning is found in particular in the constraints imposed in terms of security of the 
information systems underlying these services, which must be capable of processing Restricted 
Diffusion information. This level of requirement has natural repercussions on the price of associated 
services, which is therefore not fully adapted to the needs of other entities, or less critical information 
systems, for which the nature of the threat does not justify not necessarily such a level of service. 
There would therefore be an interest in exploring the possibilities of less demanding qualifications, 
for less ambitious levels of services corresponding better to the needs of non-critical information 
systems of companies, administrations and communities. The associated reference systems would 
naturally aim to cover the same skills as the existing qualifications, but by relaxing certain 
constraints, in particular the architecture and security of the information systems associated with the 
services. 
Like the elementary certification system proposed above for products, the role that the State would 
be called upon to play in such an elementary qualification of service providers would still have to be 
clarified. Involving the public authorities, drawing on both their experience and their knowledge of 
the threat, in the definition of qualification benchmarks seems a priori relevant. On the other hand, 
the interest of an extended involvement in the functioning of the qualification scheme, once it has 
been established, is more debatable: these qualifications could potentially be delegated to 
specialised private actors, the State confining itself to verifying the ability of the latter to conduct 
qualifications. 
  
Page 116 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3.2.5 Developing the qualification of secure digital service providers 
The providers of secure digital services qualified to date are mainly concentrated in very specific 
business sectors, notably related to electronic signature. An extension of the assurances provided 
by these qualifications to more general digital activities seems relevant, in particular because of the 
significant contribution that it could have on the security of entities which very largely outsource their 
use of digital technology. 
Cloud providers 
The development of cloud computing is a very structuring evolution of information systems. In 
addition to its economic or functional advantages, the cloud is a very attractive solution for entities 
with only limited IT skills, who can find in cloud providers an information system base much better 
controlled than they would be likely to put themselves in place. On the other hand, this development 
of the cloud, resulting in massive outsourcing of information systems, and their concentration under 
the control of the main cloud providers, creates a reinforced need for confidence in these providers. 
This observation motivated the development by the ANSSI of the qualification scheme for cloud 
service providers called SecNumCloud. 
The final version of the associated repository having been made public in September 2017, the first 
qualifications should be announced during 2018. This repository sets a set of technical, legal and 
contractual requirements which decline, in the context of the cloud, good security practices digital. 
However, the SecNumCloud qualification is not backed by any regulatory requirement, and its 
attractiveness could be improved in order to bring more cloud players to make the efforts necessary 
to bring them into compliance with the standard. In addition to the leverage of public procurement – 
relatively limited to date in the cloud – a significant factor of attractiveness could be found in bringing 
the requirements of the standard closer to the constraints resulting from the new European data 
protection regulation personal data (GDPR), coming into force in mid-2018, which will have a very 
structuring effect on this sector of activity. 
Managed services providers 
Outsourcing is an alternative and complementary model to cloud computing instead of outsourcing 
its information system to a cloud, the client outsources the sole management (administration, 
updates, supervision) of its information system, which also remains physically under its control. The 
quality of the managed services can constitute a powerful lever to improve the level of security of 
the customers of this service, who generally do not otherwise have the capacity to secure 
themselves. This is why the establishment of a qualification scheme for service providers in secure 
outsourcing appears necessary. 
  
Page 117 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3.2.6 The establishment of a certification framework harmonised at European level 
An important factor in the lack of attractiveness of security certification for certain use cases is the 
lack of international recognition of the certificates issued, in view of the investments made to obtain 
these certificates. Indeed, the certifications established in France under the so-called "Common 
Criteria" standard only benefit from partial recognition under international agreements, notably the 
SOG-IS agreement allowing mutual recognition between 14 European states, while those falling 
under First Level Security Certification (CSPN), which are less expensive, are only recognised in 
France. 
An important factor in the lack of attractiveness of security certification for certain use cases is the 
lack of international recognition of the certificates issued, in view of the investments made to obtain 
these certificates. Indeed, the certifications established in France under the so-called "Common 
Criteria" standard only benefit from partial recognition under international agreements, in particular 
the SOG-IS agreement allowing mutual recognition between 14 European states, while those falling 
under First Level Security Certification (CSPN), which are less expensive, are only recognized in 
France. 
The European Commission presented, on 13 September 2017, a package of cybersecurity 
measures, which notably proposes the establishment of a European regulatory framework for the 
certification of the security of digital products and services. This initiative offers a unique opportunity 
to harmonize security certification at European level, and therefore to ensure recognition extended 
to all Member States, a pledge of greater attractiveness. The work of the Commission in this area 
must, therefore, be encouraged and supported. 
However, care should be taken to ensure that this new framework and its implementation perpetuate 
the experience acquired by the pioneering Member States in the area of certification, including 
France, and integrate the good practices established in this regard. In particular, in addition to 
elementary conformity certifications according to the guidelines presented in the previous 
Paragraph, the European framework must incorporate a certification component capable of meeting 
the highest levels of security requirements, essential to meet the needs of States and the most 
exposed industrial activities, and to this end integrate the essential principles which guarantee the 
effectiveness of the current system and its adaptation if necessary. 
Furthermore, it will also be necessary to ensure that European harmonisation does not result in the 
national capacity to issue security qualifications, incorporating additional criteria, to meet the needs 
related to national security. 
Like the qualification of security products, that of service providers covered by a national system 
without international recognition, with the sole exception of trusted providers qualified under the 
eIDAS regulation. However, an extension, total or partial, of the French model of qualification of 
service providers would have a double usefulness, by reinforcing the attractiveness of the system 
for service providers established on the whole of the European market, on the one hand, and by 
helping to significantly improve the security of the digital single market, on the other hand. 
  
Page 118 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Such an extension seems particularly relevant in the field of secure digital service providers, insofar 
as the suppliers concerned generally have a market and an offer extended to the whole of the 
European market, even on a global scale for the main cloud providers. Furthermore, the security of 
these digital services constitutes an important part of the European Network Information Security 
Directive, and a apparel for validating this security would, therefore, find its place in the 
implementation of this directive from mid-2018. Finally, the requirements carried by these 
qualifications, and the associated verification procedures, seem fairly easily integrated into the 
harmonised framework for the certification of products and services recently proposed by the 
European Commission. In this particular case, the national qualification would easily become 
certification at European level. 
At first glance, the relevance and the feasibility of a European extension of the qualifications of cyber 
defence providers seems more questionable: the corresponding professions more generally 
constitute local services, the market of which often remains local. Furthermore, the specificity of 
these qualifications, which necessarily imply an assessment of the providers' professional skills, and 
not only of technical or organisational requirements on their information system, makes their 
harmonisation at a multinational level much more complex. In particular, such assessments seem 
difficult to integrate into their current state within the framework of certification proposed by the 
European Commission, which would require significant adaptations to allow competence tests. 
However, a European extension of these qualifications would be of indisputable interest, in particular 
because of the wide use of European institutions for such providers, through markets in which a 
significant portion of qualified providers in France are generally candidates. The recognition, at a 
minimum, of the qualifications of cybersecurity providers by the European institutions would thus 
present a double advantage of valuing the investments made by the qualified providers, on the one 
hand, and of improving the security of the European institutions, on the other go. 
3.3 The cybersecurity economy 
To establish its digital sovereignty, France should have a real industrial strategy. Such an approach 
would involve identifying the objectives to be achieved in terms of national industrial offer or 
confidence to meet the needs of the Nation in the field of cybersecurity and by defining the means 
to be implemented to achieve these objectives. 
In this regard, the reflections conducted within the framework of this strategic review lead to consider 
strengthening in several directions the French industrial base and the foundation of a European 
cybersecurity industrial base. They also show the need for the State to have efficient and certified 
security products. 
  
Page 119 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
3.3.1 The national industrial base 
Today, the development of an ambitious trusted industry in the field of cyber defence products and 
services is essential to relay and extend the action of the State, whether at national or European 
level. It is a question of developing an industrial capacity which is able to offer products and services 
at the same time of a very high level of security while being economically viable. 
The French cybersecurity industry can be characterised by the presence of a few large groups with 
a large international footprint and many small or very small companies. There is, in fact, almost no 
medium-sized company, which is more in the field of cyber defence products. 
 
The activity covered by large groups is built around three axes. 
The first is linked to the government's high level of security needs for which the French State has 
decided to maintain a sovereign capacity, in particular in the field of cryptography and encryption. 
These high-security needs made it possible to bring out a civil offer. France thus has equipment 
which guarantees it control over the security of its networks, including in the face of attackers of very 
high technical level. However, the national civil service is struggling to impose itself abroad and 
would benefit from being renewed. 
The second axis is linked to the field of smart cards, with historical players such as GEMPLUS, 
SCHLUMBERGER or OBERTHUR. These players now rely on the skills and knowledge acquired 
to develop world-class authentication and access management solutions. 
  
Page 120 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Finally, French IT service companies have positioned themselves globally to oversee the security 
of their customers' networks and operate today worldwide. These manufacturers also integrate 
cybersecurity solutions into the information systems they design wherever they administer. 
These fields are intended to come together as illustrated by the rapprochement between BULL and 
ATOS or more recently that of GEMALTO and THALES. 
In addition to the activity covered by large groups, some experts are embarking on the creation of 
start-ups. The available funding and the lack of expertise in the field of cybersecurity allow them to 
develop, even in the absence of a successful industrial strategy and without being forced to conquer 
international markets. In fact, the high-level expertise services they can provide to French customers 
are most of the time sufficient to support these small businesses whose structure costs can be quite 
reduced. However, despite these proven technical skills, it remains a challenge for these SMEs to 
become international champions. 
Faced with these findings, this strategic review has identified three areas for improvement: 
• encourage major French industrialists in the sector to complete their range of cybersecurity 
products and services for the civilian sector, in order to enable them to become 
international cybersecurity champions; 
• encourage the creation of medium-sized enterprises (ETI) by helping the most successful 
SMEs to grow quickly and make relevant acquisitions. Today, it is the only option available 
to enable them to reach a size that puts them in a position to compete with their foreign 
counterparts or to conquer the European market. The State will support and encourage 
these external growth strategies by mobilizing investment funds interested in the field of 
cyber defence; 
• increase the number of start-ups by encouraging and supporting experts from the 
administration or large companies to embark on this challenge. In order to achieve this 
objective, it is essential for the State to support the establishment of accelerators, studio 
start-ups and more generally support structures for start-ups dedicated to cyber defence. 
Efforts should be concentrated on innovative companies whose strategy can enable them 
to achieve a global footprint. 
3.3.2 Define an industrial cybersecurity policy and build a European cybersecurity industrial 
base 
The construction of an industrial cybersecurity and cyber defence base faces two difficulties today. 
The first is the absence of a real European cybersecurity market, which does not allow, contrary to 
what can be observed for American or Chinese companies, the growth of companies on the basis 
of the single internal market. This is due both to a heterogeneity of practices and standards between 
countries, to certain constraints existing at European level which can paradoxically complicate 
overall market access, but also to the fact that the European market remains easily today accessible 
to non-European companies. 
  
Page 121 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The second difficulty is a certain difference in conception between Member States of the European 
Union on the nature of a "European enterprise". For some, it is simply a company with solid bases 
in Europe or a head office in Europe. For others, on the contrary, are companies which belong, in a 
stable and long-term manner, to European investors. 
In addition, the question of trusted European companies very clearly poses the question of the 
sphere of sovereignty and the link between sovereignty and economic development. 
These issues should not, however, curb France's desire to encourage the construction of European 
cybersecurity players. Several axes of effort could allow the constitution of such an industry. 
The first effort is to identify the areas in which France believes that a European industry must be set 
up to maintain or even regain strategic autonomy. This effort must in particular be concretised by 
the establishment of European financial supports no longer solely to support research but according 
to a much broader approach integrating in a coherent manner all the dimensions of capacity 
programmes, support for innovation, support for export, etc. 
The second axis is to promote the emergence of a real European market supporting the 
development of efficient European solutions. If this line of effort should not oppose an open market 
logic, it nevertheless constitutes a necessity to guarantee the strategic autonomy of Europe and its 
member states in the digital field. 
The implementation of a European certification scheme would also allow security offers to progress 
at European level while leading manufacturers to demonstrate greater transparency on their 
solutions. 
Finally, for certain areas, the establishment of European systems for the protection of companies 
deemed to be sensitive to foreign investors, or even the possibility of reserving certain sensitive 
public procurement contracts for European companies, are essential conditions for the success of 
this approach. These markets could be opened to foreign players, provided that both transparency 
and independence commitments are imposed. 
3.3.3 Having efficient and certified products 
Qualification is a proven mechanism well suited to validating state security requirements for 
conventional security products. France, however, suffers from an insufficient catalogue of qualified 
products, both in terms of diversity of suppliers and coverage of certain needs of administrations or 
OIV, especially in emerging areas such as that of detection probes. Furthermore, the current 
qualification mechanism, focused on security assessment, does not take into account functional 
expectations in the broad sense (richness of functionality, performance, ergonomics) of the client, 
and therefore suffers from a negative image (qualified products are often perceived as functionally 
inferior). The pioneering work on modernisation, already underway for the qualification of detection 
probes, could serve as a model, based on feedback, for the qualification of functional requirements. 
  
Page 122 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Qualification of attack detection probes 
The military programming law relating to the 2014-2019 period, introduced, for OIVs, an obligation 
to deploy probes qualified to detect attacks. As such, the ANSSI has initiated work to define the 
requirements underlying the qualification of such products. Breaking with previous approaches, 
these requirements relate not only to the intrinsic security of the product, but also to its functional 
efficiency and performance. Both types of requirements, security as well as functional, must be 
analysed by private assessment centres which have so far carried out only security assessments. 
The first probe qualifications should be pronounced during 2018. This site has a high degree of 
priority, both in terms of meeting the regulatory needs of OIVs and as a precursor to what could be 
a qualification integrating functional requirements. 
Functional testing of qualified products 
Beyond this pioneering work, it seems desirable to generalize, as much as possible, the integration 
of functional tests in the product qualification process. This generalisation could also be inspired, in 
addition to work aimed at qualifying detection probes, the approach implemented by NATO, which, 
for the acquisition of security products, has for many years combined security evaluation 
(SECEVAL) and operational evaluation (OPEVAL). It might also be relevant to explore different 
avenues for carrying out functional tests, the model chosen for the probes (functional and security 
assessment conducted by the same actor) not necessarily being applicable to all use cases. 
Functional validation could thus be carried out by other types of private actors, by technological 
research institutes (IRT), or even by user clubs. Its result could also differ depending on the use 
case: certificate of compliance when a precise specification can be defined, or classification in 
relation to the state of the art of the market in other cases. 
Diversification of suppliers of qualified products 
The suppliers of currently qualified products are in their vast majority French, which contributes to a 
reducing image of the apparatus, harms the diversity of the catalogues, and does not allow the 
satisfaction of certain needs. However, this preponderance of national suppliers does not result from 
a choice, but rather from a combination of factors: low attractiveness of the system for foreign 
suppliers, low readability of its criteria, or difficulty for a foreign player to fulfil some of the 
commitments associated with the qualification (access of the evaluator to the source code for 
example). 
  
Page 123 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Improved accessibility of the system to new suppliers, especially foreign ones, naturally subject to 
compliance with security and confidence requirements, would be likely to increase the rate of 
coverage of needs. In particular, greater use of this system by European suppliers appears desirable 
as part of the consolidation of European strategic autonomy. 
The publication in 2017 of a detailed qualification process, and of all the objective criteria and 
associated commitments, contributed significantly to the improvement of the readability of aa 
apparatus long considered opaque. In addition, the extension through the LPM 2014-2019 of the 
field of application of qualification to OIV, and no longer only to administrations, has significantly 
increased the attractiveness of the system. The ability of a foreign supplier to fulfil certain 
commitments remains problematic, however, for various reasons (limits on the export from the 
country of origin of sensitive design information, the supplier's general policy on the protection of 
intellectual property, etc.). Insofar as these commitments are directly linked to security and 
confidence considerations inherent in the intended use, it would not be appropriate to reduce the 
level of requirement in this area. However, alternative approaches (access by the evaluator to the 
source code under the control of the supplier, rather than supplying the source code) or 
complementary approaches (reciprocal commitment of the State vis-à-vis the supplier) could be 
explored in order to facilitate keeping commitments, and promoting diversification of suppliers of 
qualified products. 
Increased support from public procurement on qualification 
The use of qualified products generally results from a simple recommendation of use, rather than 
from an obligation. The obligation for OIVs to use qualified detection probes is a notable exception 
in this respect. Conversely, the rate of use of qualified products by administrations remains very low, 
public procurement representing, according to a study conducted by the ANSSI in 2015, barely 10% 
of purchases of qualified products. 
Greater exemplarity of administrations in the use of qualified products would have many beneficial 
effects: improvement of the security level of administrations by the use of verified solutions, 
strengthening of the attractiveness of qualification, economic development of suppliers of qualified 
products, ultimately promoting their functional improvement, etc. If the introduction of a general 
obligation to use such products appears premature, in particular with regard to the insufficient 
coverage of certain needs, more targeted actions could be taken, either to facilitate the acquisition 
of these products by administrations (inter-ministerial framework markets, release licenses) or to 
make their use compulsory in certain contexts. 
  
Page 124 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The international scope of the qualification 
Qualification is a purely national device, even if comparable approaches are found in several 
countries, at least for state needs. Insofar as it is a tool intimately linked to the preservation of 
national security, it does not seem opportune at this stage to seek to give it regulatory support at 
European level. On the other hand, the bilateral or multilateral promotion of this model and its virtues 
with the other Member States of the European Union seems justified in terms of sharing good 
practices contributing to the defence of sovereign information systems and, therefore, to the 
preservation of European strategic autonomy. Wider dissemination of the model would also help 
develop its acceptability and encourage solution providers to engage in such an approach. 
3.3.4 The cybersecurity rating and compliance issues 
Large-scale computer attacks can have very significant consequences on the financial health of 
companies. The Autorité des Marchés Financiers has also highlighted cyber risk in its "2017 Risk 
Mapping". 
To take just one example, the Notpetya malware created a lot of damage to Saint-Gobain's 
information system and loss of production that the company estimated at 250 million euros in sales 
and 80 million euros on its operating profit for 2017. The consequences of this attack may, therefore, 
impact the shareholders of the company, who might want to know the risk incurred in the event of a 
new attack of the same type. 
To answer this legitimate question, many companies offer cyber rating services. The largest, now 
American, are called BITSIGHT, SECURITY SCORECARD or even QUADMETRICS (bought by 
the financial risk rating company FICO) and offer to rate the cybersecurity of companies, their 
subcontractors but also that of 'a country or industry sector. These ratings, which are carried out 
today from outside of information systems, thus making it possible to rate many players without their 
knowledge. This first assessment of cyber risk is obviously not satisfactory, but it constitutes a first 
step which will encourage the financial markets, insurers but also customers to institutionalize these 
ratings. The major players in the field will, therefore, become factual references which will be difficult 
to dislodge. Companies, and perhaps even states, will then have to finance their own rating with 
these companies. The rating will be established with an external evaluation at first, but quickly the 
rated actors will be called upon to provide information on their information system, to have internal 
audits carried out and perhaps even to report their incidents to these new rating agencies. 
  
Page 125 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In this context, it is essential that the European Union develops an offer in this area, so that French 
and European companies are not de facto subject to uncontrolled rules. An incentive approach could 
thus be put in place to encourage the emergence of European players in cyber rating. France is not 
helpless in this respect and has a recognised cybersecurity service offer likely to bring out 
competitive companies in this new field. The labelling of this French offer by the State or by groups 
of private companies could promote the structuring of this area and allow an improvement in the 
quality of ratings. 
This approach could be supported by a modification of financial accounting standards to take into 
account cyber risk for larger companies. As the Bank for International Settlements' 87th annual 
report points out: “Technologies based on large volumes of personal data (...) present new 
challenges in the protection of privacy and data security. Growing concerns about cybersecurity 
highlight the potential risks of technology-based financial services. In order to maintain the integrity 
of the IT systems, it may be necessary to apply criteria of vigilance with regard to potentially multiple 
internal and external service providers”*. 
This approach could also be encouraged by funding cyber rating by European players, in addition 
to projects already funded, for example in the context of RO projects or public contracts that concern 
sensitive areas. 
3.3.5 The establishment of a virtuous circle for securing systems through a relevant 
insurance mechanism 
The insurance market has always been structured independently. Yet cyber insurance is struggling 
to establish itself today and the European market is far from mature. Various structural factors 
explain the difficulty of modelling an offer and meeting the market. Within a company, cyber risk 
must be seen as a risk among the others and considered from an economic angle, conducive to its 
insurability. On the other hand, for insurers, the absence of baseline data on cyber risk, as well as 
its potentially systemic nature, constitute difficulties today that have not been overcome. 
The lack of a common vocabulary (recognised technical standards on security incidents reporting 
and classification) prejudices a true international comparison of national systems and data collected 
in each country under threat. In general, methodological problems prevent the determination of 
probabilities of the occurrence of digital risk incidents, thus reducing the capacity of politicians to 
effectively allocate public funds, insurers to assess their coverage or risk managers to reduce or 
transfer the identified risks. 
  
 
 
* 87th annual report of the Bank for International Settlements, p. 104 
(https://www.bis.org/pubI/arpdf/ar2017_fr.pdf). 
Page 126 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Collecting quantitative information on cyber risk is a second major difficulty. The information relating 
to the incidents is little or not shared* at no place of centralisation of such information and no 
reflection has yet been carried out as for its structuring. Furthermore, this absence of statistics 
prevents modelling the offer (although in France, the government platform cybermalveillance.gouv.fr 
is starting to do so and that internationally other initiatives have been launched). The establishment 
of a European database listing the majority of cyber incidents would, therefore, be a step forward. 
Data could be aggregated to analyse threat trends, identify security needs for products and services 
on the market, and provide cost information. The current establishment of mandatory mechanisms 
for the notification of incidents within the European Union (notably through the GDPR, the NIS 
directive and the telecoms package) could usefully contribute to the establishment of an inventory 
of digital risk. 
A final difficulty relates to the question of the valuation of intangible goods which constitute 85% of 
the value of companies today. An information asset, as understood in a digital economy, is an 
intangible which is neither qualified in legal terms nor quantified in accounting terms. It is therefore 
not an insurable asset. The insurability of the intangible asset represents an essential stake for the 
valuation of the company in a digital economy. 
Another key issue is the implementation of a cyber risk management policy, integrated into business 
risk management. Listed companies have had an obligation since 2011 to adopt risk management 
practices, based on mapping tools, a governance committee and audits. These good practices must 
be developed in all companies, while taking into account their level of maturity and their size, 
because they make it possible to raise awareness among the governing bodies and constitute a 
prerequisite for the reasoned subscription of a cyber insurance offer. 
3.4 Human challenges 
The level of cybersecurity in our society is directly linked to the behaviour of all French people – 
individuals, businesses and administrations – and therefore to their degree of understanding and 
mastery of cybersecurity issues. State services, businesses and individuals are indeed increasingly 
connected by technologies offering new ways of working, interacting and transacting. Under the 
pressure of mobility, massive use of data and the Internet of Things, digital is spreading faster and 
deeper. If the spread of the digital security culture does not follow, then the conditions for peaceful 
and confident use of the Internet as connected objects cannot be met. It is an educational approach, 
positive and rooted in the reality of the different audiences of the digital security culture that this 
strategic review proposes, in order to reinforce its impact and to awaken the interest of each to the 
maximum digital. Businesses, administrations and citizens must be given keys so that they become 
actors of digital security, in their personal and professional lives. 
  
 
 
* According to OECD estimates, between 60 and 89% of incidents go unreported. 
Page 127 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
This is why cybersecurity must be integrated, from elementary school to high school, into the 
students' training path. Playful approaches must, in parallel, be offered throughout life, adapted to 
the different degrees of familiarity that French people have with information and communication 
systems and their use of everyday connected objects. A greater dissemination of the digital security 
culture in businesses and in public administrations also appears desirable, while responses must 
be provided to the recruitment needs of cybersecurity specialists among them. Our country cannot 
be content to train cybersecurity and cyber defence specialists, it must also give itself the means to 
keep them and attract foreign talent. 
3.4.1 Educate cybersecurity issues from an early age 
Cybersecurity education from an early age should be a priority. Children and adolescents have a 
daily practice, and early compared to the generations that preceded them, of connected objects, the 
Internet and social networks. According to an IPSOS “Junior Connect” study dating from 2015, the 
average age of the first mobile phone is 9 years and that of the first smartphone is 12 years. Young 
people from 13 to 19 years old connect on average at 13h30 per week and 78% of them are 
registered on social networks*. However, many of these young people do not control the dangers 
linked to the communication of personal information, to the connection with strangers or to the 
publication of private photos†. 
It is up to the school of the Republic to educate students in cybersecurity. This must go through a 
first digital awareness in the kindergarten years and digital education including mastering the 
cybersecurity requirements in elementary school, middle school and in all high school courses. 
Digital education from an early age is structuring for future behaviour. The early opening to the great 
concepts of computer science techniques will give students the keys to understanding the world 
around them and will later allow them to become players in this world and not just digital consumers. 
It is about teaching students to use digital in all areas of life, to enable them to acquire a digital 
culture, from initiation to code to understanding the logic of computers sciences, passing by the 
acquisition of data processing skills and the ability to adopt behaviours that respect security rules. 
  
 
 
* In view of the trends observed in recent years, it can be estimated that these figures are, if not increasing, 
at least stable since 2015. 
† According to the same IPSOS "Junior Connect" study, 57% of 11-12 year olds have a FACEBOOK profile 
despite the prohibition to connect before the age of 13, 43% have already added strangers to their list of 
friends and 12% sent photos or videos to strangers. 
Page 128 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
In elementary school, it is important to show the links which unite the concepts of data processing 
and those which are taught in the other disciplines, then those which unite them with the familiar 
objects of the daily newspaper*. 
In college, the teaching of mathematics and technology, which integrates the learning of algorithms 
and computer programming, must constitute the main vector for transmitting the rules of 
cybersecurity. 
Obviously, learning the rules of cybersecurity must not stop at the doors of high schools, at the risk 
of seeing future young adults quickly overwhelmed by issues that are sure to renew themselves 
extremely quickly. This is why it seems essential that training to raise awareness of the challenges 
of cybersecurity must be integrated into the paths of general, technological and professional high 
school students, from the second to the final year class. 
The initial and in-service training courses for teachers, particularly in mathematics and technology, 
will have to integrate this new requirement of transmitting the rules of cybersecurity to students. 
MOOCs† dedicated to teachers in initial training and in-service training could be designed by the 
Ministry of National Education with the support of the ANSSI. New educational resources dedicated 
to raising students' awareness of IT security rules will have to be regularly made available to 
teachers‡. 
The effectiveness of raising awareness among young people about the challenges of cybersecurity 
can be enhanced by fun actions. Certain programmes have already demonstrated their 
effectiveness in the field of the dissemination of digital culture. The Internet Permit offered to 
children, a national prevention programme developed by the National Gendarmerie, the National 
Police, the Police Headquarters and the association AXA Prévention, thus makes it possible to raise 
awareness among CM2 children and their parents about vigilant Internet use, safe and responsible§. 
The Internet School system, developed by the association Ville Internet and which promotes the use 
of the Internet for French-speaking nursery and elementary school students by labelling participating 
schools, promoting their actions and encouraging exchanges of experience, also constitutes an 
interesting initiative. By taking inspiration from this system, we could, for example, imagine 
approaches to enhance, even label, the educational establishments most committed to 
cybersecurity. 
  
 
 
* Learning the rules for using the Internet must in particular be a priority. Students must know the principles 
of civic and legal responsibility of the Internet user, the rules of downloading, learn to be informed on the 
Internet but also to master social networks and protect their privacy on the web. 
† MOOC (Massive Open On Line Course): online training open to all. 
‡ The portal of the Ministry of National Education Eduscol already offers first educational resources to raise 
computer awareness among primary and secondary students. The department of digital education for this 
ministry also manages a national resource pooling bank called Edu'base. 
§ https://www.permisinternet.fr/. 
Page 129 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
This strategic review recommends the rapid establishment of a working group, under the guidance 
of the Ministry of National Education, responsible for defining the actions to be carried out, and if 
necessary, the modifications to be made to the programmes so that all students leave the education 
system with a high level of mastery of cybersecurity issues. 
3.4.2 Raising awareness among the general public through educational actions 
If awareness of the school public about cybersecurity issues is essential, awareness of the general 
public must at the same time be conducted. 
The already existing initiatives in the dissemination of digital culture constitute the first bases on 
which to build. We are thinking in particular of the civic service programme "the D-CoDeRs", 
launched in 2016, which involves volunteers committed to digital inclusion, by targeting three 
populations as a priority the poorly connected populations (who are offered workshops in places of 
local digital mediation), school and extracurricular audiences and seniors (through actions 
implemented in retirement homes or senior citizens' clubs). We also think of the EDUCNUM 
collective, initiated by the CNIL in May 2013 and made up of sixty structures*, to carry and support 
actions aimed at promoting a true “citizen digital culture”, in particular through initiation and 
promotion of actions awareness and training for all audiences, especially the youngest, on 
responsible and informed use of digital technologies. The cybermalveillance.gouv.fr platform plays 
a role in raising awareness, prevention and support in terms of digital security for the French 
population. 
But it seems essential to go further by amplifying the actions in progress, by communicating more 
effectively and more strategically, and by developing awareness actions specifically dedicated to 
the challenges of cybersecurity. 
This strategic review, therefore, recommends that a fun application, available on smartphones, be 
created allowing French people to test their level of knowledge in the field of digital security and 
offering them, whatever their initial level of proficiency, many challenges. The realisation of this 
application could be supported by the ANSSI (which already offers, with the MOOC 
SecNumacadémie, an online programme to raise awareness of digital security which is aimed at 
all†). To design this educational application on digital security, the agency could notably draw 
inspiration from the online platform for the assessment and certification of digital skills PIX, currently 
developed by the Ministries of National Education and Higher Education‡. 
  
 
 
* Companies, organisations, associations from the world of education, research, the digital economy, civil 
society, corporate foundations and other institutions. 
† https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/particulier/formations/secnumacademie/. 
‡ https://pix.beta.gouv.fr. 
The PIX platform is an online digital skills repository for lifelong digital certification. Its objective is to support 
the rise in the general level of digital knowledge and skills. 
Page 130 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
An original and innovative avenue of research would also be to study the contribution of nudges to 
the development of citizens' autonomy in cybersecurity. These incentive-based approaches, based 
on the behavioural sciences, received resounding recognition with the award of the 2017 Nobel 
Prize in economics to Richard THALER, one of the fathers of the nudge economy. Nudges are used 
to support public policies in the United States and the United Kingdom. In France, a nudge project 
manager has been recruited at SGMAP and could be asked by the ANSSI to think about setting up 
nudges to encourage more responsible behaviour by users in the face of cyber threats. 
3.4.3 Spreading the culture of digital security within businesses and public administrations 
The dissemination of the digital security culture must also be reinforced within businesses and public 
administrations. 
The ANSSI publishes guides for this purpose such as the "Guide to good IT practices", which 
presents twelve recommendations from the analysis of successful attacks aimed at very small 
businesses and SMEs*, or the guide on “Cybersecurity of industrial systems”, which offers, by 
illustrating it through real situations, to the actors concerned a simple and suitable methodology for 
securing their industrial systems. The agency also publishes a set of requirements applicable to 
cloud computing service providers (SecNumCloud), developed in consultation with market players. 
At the same time, there are many initiatives to promote cybersecurity within companies, from the 
organisation in October 2017 by ENISA (European agency responsible for network and information 
security)† of the "European Cybersecurity Month" actions led by CIGREF‡ and the European Circle 
of Security and Information Systems, via the International Cybersecurity Forum (FIC) §  or the 
European cyberWeek**. These initiatives, which are really effective, must be further amplified, their 
strengthened coordination and their dissemination widened to the greatest number of economic 
actors. Finally, the ministry responsible for the industry will contribute to this effort, in particular by 
integrating a cybersecurity dimension into its programme to support the digital transformation of 
businesses. 
  
 
 
* http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/publication/lanssi-et-la-cgpme-publient-le-guide-des-bonnes-pratiques-de-
informatique/. 
† https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/agence/cybersecurite/mois-de-Ia-cybersecurite-2017. 
‡ Association whose mission is to develop the capacity of large companies to integrate and master digital 
technology. 
§ https://www.forum.fic.com. The FIC is one of the benchmark events in terms of cybersecurity and digital 
trust, bringing together all the players in France and in Europe. 
** https://european-cyber-week.eu/fr/accueil/. 
Page 131 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Within public, central, territorial and decentralised administrations, the culture of digital security must 
be disseminated to all agents, whatever their level of responsibility or their sector of specialisation. 
Mastering the culture of digital security must be given priority in initial training and continuing 
education programmes. The development of initial and continuous training modules in national and 
territorial public service schools and the development of cyber training at the Institute for Advanced 
National Defence Studies (IHEDN) and at the National Institute for Advanced Studies of Security 
and Justice (INHES]) thus appear essential. Management must take up digital security issues, which 
cannot be the sole responsibility of the personnel and departments responsible for IT security. The 
integration of this in the definition of the missions of the executives of the public service should be 
considered. 
3.4.4 Develop the professional training offer on cybersecurity challenges 
France's level of ambition in the areas of cyber defence and cybersecurity is today constrained by 
the capabilities of its human resources, particularly with regard to engineers specialised in IT and 
telecommunications (computer networks, security, IT, crypto-analysis, etc.). Building a solid national 
digital culture requires training the experts of tomorrow. 
Associative and union approaches exist to promote the digital professions and bring down the self-
censorship reflexes of certain audiences with regard to these professions. Syntec Numérique 
(professional union of digital service companies, software publishers and technology consulting 
companies) has thus embarked on numerous actions to enhance the attractiveness of training in 
digital, such as the JEM’NUM program ("digital businesses and professions journey") or the 
Pascaline Association to encourage young people to go to engineering schools (see box below). 
Associations such as Femmes du Numérique or Informatique au Féminine raise awareness among 
young people in order to combat prejudice against women working in IT. 
  
Page 132 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Syntec Numérique's initiatives to promote the attractiveness of digital training 
The Days of digital businesses and trades (JEM'NUM) organised by Syntec Numérique are 
days of exchanges between students, universities and digital companies. These forums 
are an opportunity for students to learn about the training offered by universities in the 
digital field and to meet companies in the digital sector. They also allow universities to 
present digital training programmes to their companies, their responses to the skills needs 
of the sector and to build partnerships. Finally, they are a showcase for companies in the 
digital sector to present the attractiveness of the sector and the opportunities it opens. 
Created in 2006, the Pascaline Association (http://www.assopascaline.fr) is a space for 
exchanges and reflections between companies and higher digital education 
establishments, the objective of which is the development of attractiveness of training and 
digital professions to young generations. The association brings together eighty-five higher 
education establishments and 2,700 companies in the sector grouped around Syntec 
Numérique and the syndicate of entrepreneurs in the digital industry CINOV-IT. 
Launched by the ANSSI in 2013, following the publication of the White Paper on defence and 
national security, the CyberEdu project promotes the integration of digital security in higher 
computer training not specialised in the security of information systems by providing educational 
content to teachers. In order to extend the actions taken by the ANSSI to initiate this approach, an 
association bringing together IT teachers, specialists and non-specialists in security, was created to 
carry it throughout France, in particular through seminars. It also labels French higher education in 
IT which does not fall within the domain of digital security. Although the CyberEdu approach was 
initially intended for digital training, the association plans in the future to address other types of 
training, to raise awareness of all actors or users of the information systems chain. 
The second notable initiative carried by the ANSSI, SecNumEdu is a label of initial training in 
cybersecurity of higher education. The objective of this labelling is to provide assurance to students 
and employers that training in the field of digital security meets a charter as well as the criteria 
defined by the ANSSI in collaboration with stakeholders and professionals in the field (higher 
education establishments, manufacturers, etc.). The label also plays in favour of strengthening and 
developing lessons relating to digital security. It is based on a labelling reference system, the 
development of which was piloted by the ANSSI with the contribution of manufacturers, schools, the 
Cyber Pole of Excellence and the Ministry of National Education, Higher Education, Research and 
Innovation. It is awarded for a renewable period of three years and allows the training which benefits 
from it, to appear in the SecNumEdu catalogue of the ANSSI. Forty training courses have been 
SecNumEdu certified. 
  
Page 133 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
The ANSSI has, finally, conducted an approach to identify cybersecurity professions and a title of 
expert in information systems security (level 1 bac+5 certification) has been registered in the 
National Directory of Professional Certifications (RNCP). 
3.4.5 Perfecting skills management in the state's cyber defence services: retaining and 
attracting our talents 
In addition, the ANSSI carries out several actions for cybersecurity training and awareness within 
the framework of its Information Systems Security Training Centre (CFSSI)*. The Training Centre 
offers short courses on topics such as cryptography, risk analysis or security auditing, and welcomes 
nearly 2,000 people, mainly from the administration, each year. It also provides long training over 
thirteen months, leading to the issuance of a title "information systems security expert" equivalent 
to a bac+5. 
To complete this internal training system, the ANSSI could also label continuing training in 
cybersecurity for public sector agents and thus allow a multiplication of its training capacity. This 
strategy should make it possible to establish a minimum training in cyber defence for all executives 
and in particular those whose services or departments must defend the interests of cyber defence 
companies. 
The large employers of cyber defence that are the ANSSI and the Ministry of the Armed Forces 
today have no particular difficulty in recruiting the talents they need. However, they are faced with a 
high turnover of their teams which requires devoting a significant effort to the recruitment and 
integration of these new experts. This mobility has many advantages, however, because it allows 
these experts to spread the knowledge and good word of the ANSSI or the Ministry of the Armed 
Forces within the companies that host them. However, care must be taken to ensure that these skills 
are not caught up by the large American or Chinese digital players to the detriment of French or 
European companies. 
Conversely, other employers not specialised in cyber, whether public or private, are struggling to 
recruit personnel competent in cyber defence and especially to keep them. In fact, in structures not 
specialised in cyber, the specialist can quickly find himself isolated and blocked in his progression 
both by what he will have little outlets internally but especially because his hierarchy will want to 
keep him in this position. This lack of perspective is one of the main causes of the difficulty in 
recruiting and retaining quality specialists. 
  
 
 
* https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/particulier/formations/. 
Page 134 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
There are three ways to resolve this difficulty. 
The first would be to bring together cyber skills within the same structure which works for the benefit 
of several entities. Thus, the regions could set up, in conjunction with the ANSSI, centres of cyber 
competence capable of supporting, for example, all of the local authorities. The specialists would 
then be grouped together and could lead a coherent approach across an entire region, whether for 
the provision of technical advice, the drafting of specifications or the establishment of a market 
framework for the acquisition of cybersecurity solutions. 
The second solution would be to manage interdepartmental career paths. This type, of course, is 
already in place for large bodies of the state but the contract workers who constitute the majority of 
the personnel recruited in cyber are not concerned and have the greatest difficulties in changing 
administration without having to resign. The ANSSI could thus be responsible for steering these 
career paths and allowing real inter-ministerial progress for these agents. 
Lastly, the third solution would consist in promoting within the professional paths of the various 
administrations, the passage by a post in the field of cyber defence. One can thus imagine, for 
example, that the IT director or digital director positions are only accessible to personnel who can 
demonstrate previous cyber experience. 
  
Page 135 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Conclusion 
For the first time in such depth, the Cyber Defence Strategic Review provided a comprehensive 
overview of the cyber threat. It turns out that this threat continues to grow extremely rapidly. A certain 
number of systemic factors contribute to this, including the increasing digitisation of society, a still 
insufficient awareness of cybersecurity challenges, the wide accessibility and proliferation of 
malicious tools as well as the professionalisation of groups of attackers. The consequences of a 
large-scale cyberattack could now be critical for the Nation. 
Faced with multiple risks that can have the most serious consequences and devastating and / or 
systemic effects, the State must consolidate its organisation, around four operational chains 
dedicated to protection, military actions, intelligence and judicial investigation. The necessary 
coordination of these chains and the definition of a long-term strategy also implies the creation or 
revitalisation of steering, direction, crisis management and technical coordination bodies. 
The protection of sensitive state networks and critical infrastructure must remain a priority. 
Cooperation between the State and private actors, at the forefront of which are electronic 
communications operators, is therefore essential and must be strengthened. It is also necessary to 
develop the capabilities of the security forces and the judicial system so that they are able to respond 
to the explosion in the number of cybercrime crimes, by providing the investigative and judicial 
services with specialised skills. Finally, the State must provide support to local authorities in 
strengthening their cybersecurity, in particular by encouraging the development of shared skill 
centres. 
France must consolidate its doctrine in cyberspace and maintain specific diplomatic relations in this 
area. Depending on the partners, these dialogues can be either cooperative (for example to allow 
mutual assistance in the event of an attack of regional or global scope) or assertive in order to 
contain the level of the threat. 
It is also essential to make all stakeholders (general public, companies of all sizes, administrations) 
aware of this threat. This awareness must translate into taking into account cyber defence in 
education, from the youngest age to higher education. It could also translate economically with the 
modification of accounting standards in order to take this risk into account, or the development of 
insurance covering cyber risk. 
The economic stakes linked to all of these measures still need to be strengthened and better 
mapped. In any case, it is necessary that France encourages and supports industrial development 
in the field of cyber defence, by maintaining a national industrial offer, facilitating the incubation of 
start-ups and contributing to the European emergence of world leaders. If the stakes are mainly on 
this European scale, such as, for example, the emergence of a cloud of confidence, those related 
to (digital) sovereignty should not be forgotten. 
  
Page 136 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Finally, it is essential to develop the capabilities of the security forces and the judicial system so that 
they are able to respond to the explosion in the number of crimes linked to this growing cyber threat 
by providing the investigative and judicial services with specialised skills. Initiatives like ACTMA 
should be encouraged. 
  
Page 137 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
4 Priority recommendations 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
Consolidation of the French 
cyber defence organisation 
• Set up 4 operational chains: “protection” chain, “military 
action” chain, “intelligence” chain, “judicial investigation” 
chain. 
• Establish a cyber steering committee responsible for 
monitoring the implementation of decisions taken in matters 
of development and general organisation of the field by the 
Defence and National Security Council (CDSN). 
• Establish a cyber defence steering committee that strives to 
improve knowledge of the cyber threat, to develop an 
industrial, regulatory and normative digital sovereignty 
policy and to set up an official doctrine of global response 
to a cyber crisis. 
• Set up a cyber crisis coordination centre (C4) responsible 
for managing non-major crises. 
Immediate and 
short term 
2.2. Consolidate the 
organisation of 
cyber defence 
Strengthening the security of 
state information systems 
• Submission for opinion to ANSSI of the most important and 
most sensitive IT projects in the State from their launch 
phase. 
• Progressive connection of all the ministries to the Internet 
access platform of the Interdepartmental State Network 
(RIE) and full use of the services it offers. 
• Impose full coverage by a system for supervising the 
security of IT services used by the State, including in cases 
where these services are outsourced, and allow the ANSSI 
Immediate and 
short term, 
transmitted 
legal, economic 
impact study 
being finalised 
2.3.1. The 
protection of state 
information systems 
Page 138 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
to impose for this purpose the establishment of its detection 
systems or equivalent detection systems. 
Strengthening the protection 
of operators of vital 
importance (OIV) 
• Reinforcement of the level of requirement of the security 
rules which apply to the OIV of the sectors of the electronic 
communications and the supply of electric energy. 
Short term with a 
financial and 
legal impact 
study 
2.3.2. The 
protection of OIV 
Strengthening the protection 
of essential activities 
• A common foundation of elementary proportional security 
rules to protect actors providing essential services. 
• Search for harmonisation within the European Union of 
cybersecurity rules applying to operators of essential 
services. 
Short and 
medium terms 
2.3.3. Protection of 
essential activities 
Page 139 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
Increased involvement of 
electronic communications 
operators and hosts 
• Allow the ANSSI to rely on detection systems implemented 
by electronic communications operators to detect computer 
attacks Allow the ANSSI, when it becomes aware of a 
particularly serious threat, to put in place on the network of 
an electronic communications operator or the information 
system of a host, a local and temporary detection device 
Short term with a 
financial and 
legal impact 
study 
2.3. Improving the 
protection of 
sensitive activities 
Improvement of cyber 
protection for local 
authorities 
• Support for the creation, by the local authorities 
themselves, of a network of cybersecurity correspondents. 
• Improvement of the integration of needs and constraints 
specific to local authorities in the ANSSI standards and in 
its catalogues of qualified products and services. 
Middle term 2.3.4. The 
protection of local 
authorities 
Strengthening the fight 
against cybercrime 
• Conducting a reflection on the relevance of investigating 
cybercrime acts more systematically, including in the 
absence of a complaint, when the information gathered 
suggests the probable existence of criminal offences. 
• Obstacles to the most popular criminal platforms in order to 
reduce the feeling of impunity, which animates a certain 
number of cybercriminals. 
• Development of an active collaboration network between 
magistrates and investigators in Europe and internationally. 
Middle term 2.4. Strengthening 
the fight against 
cybercrime 
Page 140 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
Promotion of responsible 
behaviour standards in 
cyberspace 
• Strengthening export control mechanisms in the cyber 
domain for the most dangerous elements 
• Creation, at French or European level, of a think tank of 
international scope dedicated to geostrategic and legal 
questions of cyber defence within which the ideas of France 
could find a relay. 
Middle term 2.5. France’s 
international action 
in the cyber field 
3.1.5. Regulate the 
production and 
export of arms and 
offensive cyber 
activities 
Supervision of the activity of 
private actors in cyberspace 
• Launch of a French initiative as part of the G20 to regulate 
private sector activities having an impact on the 
international security of cyberspace. 
• Promote the prohibition of Hack back by private sector 
actors in cyberspace. 
• Establish at the international level a principle of security 
responsibility for systemic private actors in the design and 
maintenance of their digital products and services. 
Short term 2.5. France’s 
international action 
in the cyber field 
Definition of a doctrine of 
action in the face of a 
cyberattack 
• Adoption of a classification scheme for computer attacks. 
• Definition of options for responding to cyber incidents. 
Immediate 2.5.3. Define a 
doctrine of action 
Page 141 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
Structuring of an industrial 
digital policy based on 
mastery of key technologies 
• Establishment of an interdepartmental team responsible for 
analysing key technologies and bringing out trusted 
solutions in connection with manufacturers (technological 
watch and proposal of choices dedicated to the emergence 
of key technologies 
• Maintaining a state-of-the-art national industry in the field of 
communications encryption. 
• Development of a new generation of professional mobile 
radios for the benefit of the security forces and rescue units. 
• Support for research and development in the field of 
artificial intelligence applied to cyber defence. 
Short term 3.1. Digital 
sovereignty, an 
essential 
component of 
national sovereignty 
Secure communications 
• Identify a critical compost controlled by France and 
integrated into terminal equipment to be able to make 
secure mobile telephony. 
• Develop encryption and software partitioning techniques. 
• Study new services related to professional radio, based on 
civil technologies (5G) to bring resilience. 
Short and 
medium terms 
3.1.2 three 
technologies 
essential to our 
digital sovereignty 
Page 142 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
Cloud 
• Establish a comprehensive state policy for using the cloud. 
• Encourage the development of encryption solutions for the 
cloud. 
• Support strategic autonomy in this area. 
• Establish a global trust framework in order to orient the 
market towards SecNumCloud qualified products. 
Short and 
medium terms 
3.1.4 For cloud 
computing, invent a 
recovery strategy 
Improvement of the current 
certification framework in 
order to help improve 
product security 
• Implementation of an elementary cybersecurity certification, 
on the model of the CE marking required for the marketing 
of certain goods or services within the European area. 
Middle term 3.2.2. Improve the 
certification 
framework to 
improve product 
security 
Consolidation of our trusted 
national industrial base in the 
field of cyber defence 
• Carry out and maintain an industrial map 
• Support for the emergence of at least one benchmark 
national industrial player in the area of Threat Intelligence 
and the development of markers capable of competing with 
large American, Russian and Israeli companies in the field. 
• Encourage major French industrialists to complete their 
product and service offerings for the civilian sector, so that 
they become international cybersecurity champions 
capable of competing with the American, Russian, Chinese 
or Israeli cybersecurity giants. 
• Support the most successful external growth strategies of 
SMEs dedicated to cyber defence by mobilizing investment 
Short and 
medium terms 
3.3. The economics 
of cybersecurity 
Page 143 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
funds interested in the area of cyber defence to promote the 
creation of French mid-size companies in this sector. 
• Support for the establishment of accelerators, studio start-
ups and more generally support structures for start-ups 
dedicated to cyber defence, by focusing efforts on 
innovative companies whose strategy can enable them to 
reach a global footprint. 
Support for the private sector 
to take into account cyber 
issues 
• Support for the emergence of national or European players 
in cyber ratings. 
• Study support for the development of a relevant cyber 
insurance mechanism by helping to better assess risks. 
• Support for the implementation of a CYBER risk valuation 
within accounting standards and for inclusion in accounting 
and financial documents. 
Middle term 3.3. The economics 
of cybersecurity 
Page 144 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
Integration of cybersecurity 
rules in the learning 
transmitted by the School 
from elementary school to 
the final year class 
• Digital education including mastery of cybersecurity 
requirements in elementary school, middle school and all 
high school courses. 
• MOOCs on the transmission of cybersecurity rules 
dedicated to teachers in initial training and in-service 
training designed by the Ministry of National Education with 
the strong support of ANSSI. 
Middle term 3.4. Human issues 
Spreading the culture of 
digital security throughout 
society 
• Creation by ANSSI of a fun application, available on 
smartphones, allowing French people to test their level of 
knowledge in the field of digital security culture and offering 
them many challenges. 
• Study of the contribution of nudges to the development of 
citizens' autonomy in cybersecurity. 
• Integration of a cybersecurity dimension into the support 
programme for the digital transformation of businesses of 
the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the State 
Secretariat for Digital Affairs. 
• Improvement of skills management in the state's cyber 
Middle term 3.4. Human issues 
Page 145 of 160 
Cyber Defence Strategic Review - February 12, 2018 
Recommendations Implementation 
schedule 
Development in the 
strategic review 
defence services. 
